Title: EvidenT: Building Trustworthy Enterprise Assistants through Evidence Groundedness and Traceability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.22537v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 00:19:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# EvidenT : Building Trustworthy Enterprise Assistants through Evidence Groundedness and Traceability 

## Anubha Kabra Katie Jooyoung Kim Colin Zhiwei Kou Helene Sajer Yimei Fan Radomir Cisar Heather Greenhalgh Gabriel Martinez Vidiri Bloomberg     

> {akabra16, ckou9, yfan258, rcisar, hgreenhalgh1, gmartinezvi1}@bloomberg.net jk4534@columbia.edu helene.sajer.pro@gmail.com

## Abstract 

Enterprise AI assistants must produce re-sponses that are verifiable and traceable to source evidence. However, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) over heteroge-neous enterprise data can suffer from citation drift, unsupported content, and weak source traceability. We present EvidenT (T = Trust + Transparency + Traceability), a lightweight pipeline that verifies extracted evidence against retrieved documents before answer generation, without model retraining. EvidenT combines structured passage extraction with deterministic lexical alignment to filter unsupported content, correct citation drift, and preserve source-span traceability. On approximately 500 real enter-prise queries, EvidenT improves gold-source hit rate by an average of 29% over prompt-ing baselines, produces no citations to non-retrieved urls , and achieves near-saturated answer-to-source lexical coverage. 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in question answering (QA) with large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration (RAG) pipelines, which pair LLMs with document retrievers to generate responses with inline citations, have achieved strong results on web-scale benchmarks (Novikova et al., 2017; La-ban et al., 2022; Kryscinski et al., 2020). How-ever, applying these techniques to enterprise data presents additional challenges, particularly when source documents are heterogeneous, noisy, and in-consistently structured. In enterprise domains such as finance, healthcare, and law, factual precision and transparent source verification are particularly important (Chen et al., 2024b). Additionally, enter-prise content is often fragmented across long, noisy, and inconsistently structured documents, making it harder for systems to locate and present the most relevant information accurately (Umar et al., 1999). In our pilot deployment, we observed responses containing claims that were not well aligned with cited source content, as well as citations that were difficult to verify (Joren et al., 2025; Choubey et al., 2025; Packowski et al., 2024). To better understand these challenges, we con-ducted a month-long pilot deployment of an enter-prise assistant built using a standard RAG archi-tecture (see Appendix A for details). The assis-tant was deployed to 55 users spanning roles such as operations, legal, and support, and processed approximately 4,000 real-world queries. The re-sulting dataset was used to evaluate our proposed approach. Prompts used for this pilot are available in Appendix B. 

1.1 Limitations of Pilot Enterprise Assistant Deployment Groundedness refers to whether generated claims are supported by source documents. Traceability 

refers to the ability to associate generated content with localized supporting spans in the source mate-rial. The pilot exposed three recurring citation and traceability failure modes in this setting (Table 1). 

Invalid Citation Links: The assistant generated plausible-looking urls that were not present in the retrieved enterprise sources. 

Citation Drift: A valid document was cited, but the cited document did not contain the source text corresponding to the generated content. 

Limited Traceability: Even when the cited doc-ument was appropriate, locating the relevant sup-porting text within long or unstructured documents could be difficult. These challenges led us to investigate the following research questions. 

RQ1: Can we improve citation grounding and prevent invalid citation urls without model re-training? 

RQ2: Can generated answers be reliably traced arXiv:2609.22537v1 [cs.AI] 18 Sep 2026 Error Type Description Root Cause Impact           

> Hallucinated Links Nonexistent citations or urls Pattern-based generation Erodes trust Citation Drift Cited passage doesn’t support claim Misaligned grounding Reduces factual reliability Limited Traceability Hard to locate cited text Buried content, weak anchors Lowers transparency
> Table 1: Key limitations of the pilot enterprise assistant deployment.

to localized source spans in noisy and heteroge-neous enterprise documents? We propose a lightweight pipeline designed to improve citation reliability and source traceability in extractive enterprise question answering. The approach operates without model retraining and can be applied on top of existing retrieval and gen-eration components. The pipeline extracts candi-date evidence, verifies it against retrieved source documents using lexical alignment, and generates answers from the resulting verified passages with associated source citations. This design prioritizes verifiability and source traceability under the oper-ational constraints of enterprise deployment. On an evaluation set of approximately 500 queries derived from the pilot, EvidenT improves gold-source hit rate by an average of 29% over prompting baselines, produces no citations to non-retrieved 

urls , and achieves near-saturated lexical answer-to-source coverage. 

## 2 Previous Work 

2.1 Fine-tuning and Domain Adaptation of Generative Models 

Fine-tuning large language models has been ex-tensively explored to enhance grounding and fac-tual accuracy in retrieval augmented generation (RAG) pipelines (Huang et al., 2024; Penzkofer and Baumann, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). However, fine-tuning requires large quantities of domain-specific labeled or synthetic data, which are of-ten unavailable in enterprise contexts. Although fine-tuned models may yield more coherent re-sponses, they still hallucinate or over-generalize under weak retrieval, as shown in (Lee et al., 2025) and (Soudani et al., 2024). Moreover, fine-tuning primarily improves fluency rather than factual trace-ability (Ghosal et al., 2024), leaving outputs diffi-cult to map to supporting source spans. Prior work (Huang et al., 2024) shows that while model-level optimization can lower hallucination frequency, it fails to guarantee transparent citation alignment or user-verifiable provenance, limiting its utility in domains requiring citation-level accountability. 

2.2 Basic RAG Systems 

Despite widespread use in grounded question an-swering, RAG systems continue to exhibit weak-nesses in heterogeneous or noisy enterprise en-vironments (Chen et al., 2024a). The retrieval stage remains a major bottleneck: most retriev-ers assume clean, well-indexed corpora, whereas enterprise repositories are fragmented and incon-sistent. Comprehensive reviews (Sharma, 2025; Brown et al., 2025) identify retrieval noise, redun-dancy, and incomplete indexing as leading sources of downstream hallucinations. Even when relevant materials are retrieved, citation drift often occurs, where models cite correct documents but extract un-supported passages (Patel and Anand, 2024; Huang et al., 2024). Because retrieval and generation are typically decoupled, existing pipelines lack explicit mechanisms to ensure that each claim is grounded in an identifiable source span. As a result, citation precision remains low, undermining user trust and auditability in enterprise deployments. 

2.3 Lack of Focus on Complete Traceability 

In RAG and LLM-based question answering, com-plete traceability , linking each generated factual statement to its exact supporting span, is essen-tial for enterprise use. While prior work (Rashkin et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2025) introduces citation metrics focused on precision and recall, these do not capture the span-level grounding required for verifiable outputs. Furthermore, most evaluations (Gao et al., 2023) rely on public benchmarks with short, homogeneous texts that differ markedly from the long and unstructured documents found in en-terprise corpora. Consequently, current systems lack fine-grained provenance and remain limited in supporting transparent and verifiable generation. 

## 3 Our Approach 

Figure 1 presents the pipeline components, and Fig-ure 2 illustrates the end-to-end query-processing workflow. The pipeline includes the following com-ponents. Figure 1: Complete modular pipeline. 

3.1 Document Retrieval Module 

This module operates via an automated federated retrieval process. Upon receiving a query, the sys-tem acts as a federated orchestrator, triggering par-allel API calls to multiple pre-configured, inde-pendent data sources (e.g., wikis, policy manuals, and technical documentation). Because these enter-prise repositories are managed independently, we treat each backend as a distinct “black box”. The pipeline interfaces directly with each source’s na-tive retrieval infrastructure (whether lexical, dense, or hybrid) to aggregate the top N relevant docu-ments into a unified context. This retriever-agnostic design ensures the system scales flexibly to new data sources in real time without requiring costly index re-alignment or manual intervention. 

3.2 Structured Passage Extraction Module 

This module extracts candidate passages from re-trieved documents using an LLM with structured output formatting. The prompt is designed to re-turn verbatim spans from the document context (see Appendix D). Each passage is represented in the following JSON structure:    

> {"passage_id": "<passage_id>", "url": "<url>", "content": "<passage_content>" }

We take advantage of the fact that LLMs achieve near-perfect performance on verbatim span extrac-tion from long-context source documents (Hsieh et al., 2024) and structurally straightforward format transformations (Yang et al., 2025). 

3.3 Alignment and Filtering Module 

This module filters hallucinated passages based on n-gram overlap with their source documents. For each passage, we retrieve the full content of the source document using the provided url field. We then compute the n-gram overlap (typically n = 5 )between the passage and the document content. Let 

p be an extracted passage and d its cited document. Define the n-gram overlap ratio as      

> overlap n(p, d ) = |Gn(p)∩Gn(d)||Gn(p)|.(1)

where Gn(p) is the multiset of n-grams in p. We define the filtering action as follows: • If overlap > threshold : the passage is retained with the original URL. • If 0 < overlap ≤ threshold : the passage is trun-cated to retain only the overlapping portion; the original url is preserved. • If overlap = 0 : we suspect citation drift. We iter-ate over all other retrieved documents to find one with overlap > threshold. If found, the passage 

url is replaced with the correct one. • If none of these conditions apply, we drop the passage from the generated JSON. We rely on lexical matching because our enter-prise data is out of distribution with respect to the training data of most semantic models, because our design prioritizes verifiability over abstraction. Based on our experiments, the n-gram with a thresh-old of 0.7 performs best for our setting. This over-lap threshold is configurable. In lower-risk or less latency-sensitive deployments, practitioners may tune the threshold or incorporate semantic or hy-brid matching strategies. For the ablation on our data please see Appendix G. 

3.4 Answer Generation Module 

A second LLM call generates the final answer us-ing only the filtered and verified verbatim passages. Guided by a structured prompt (Appendix D), the LLM enforces strict grounding and formatting con-Figure 2: A step-by-step visual of our pipeline showing how a query is processed, from document retrieval to  

> answer generation with example content that is entirely fictional and used only for illustration.

straints to ensure maximal traceability while trans-forming the verbatim passages into a coherent and digestible answer. Each sentence in the final answer is cited using the associated url fields, allowing the exact source location of the supporting content to be surfaced to the user. In the user interface, we highlight the precise text spans corresponding to each citation in the source documents (Figure 2). Clicking an inline citation takes the user directly to the exact location from which the referenced information originates. 

3.5 Post-processing Module 

The post-processing module programmatically re-fines the generation from 3.4 to create a coherent fi-nal output to be presented to the users. The process-ing includes formatting paragraphs, removing re-peated citation urls , and standardizing company-specific terms. Ensuring that product names ap-pear in a consistent, correctly capitalized format improves legibility. 

## 4 Experimental Settings 

We use two publicly available open-weight models of differing sizes – LLaMA-3.1-8B (M1) and 

LLaMA-3.3-70B (M2) – to demonstrate that our strategy is agnostic to model scale. We use open-weight models to adhere to data constraints. The test set has approximately 500 data points, col-lected from our initial pilot study to closely reflect real user behavior. For maximal determinism, the temperature for each model call is set to 0.0. 

## 5 Baselines 

Building on the limitations in Section 2, we evalu-ate baselines that align with our goals of improving 

grounding and traceability without retraining or multi-stage orchestration. Our design follows two principles. (1) Scope alignment: we improve grounding and traceabil-ity in a model- and data-agnostic way; compar-ing with fine-tuned RAG systems (Asai et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2025) would conflate architec-tural complexity with our verification mechanism. 

(2) Practical relevance: enterprise environments often preclude retraining or large-scale supervision due to privacy, fragmentation, and latency con-straints, including strict limits on real-time LLM calls (Qian et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024). Thus, we evaluate under realistic plug-and-play condi-tions. EvidenT remains complementary to ad-vanced verifier-based systems and can be layered on them for stronger grounding and traceability. See Appendix H for why more complex verification or fine-tuning frameworks are omitted. We com-pare with two representative baselines (prompts in Appendix C): 

Direct Prompting with Inline Citations: The LLM generates citations inline as part of its re-sponse, serving as a minimal citation-aware base-line without explicit verification (Singal et al., 2024; Lewis et al., 2020). 

Ground-Every-Sentence: The LLM appends a citation after every sentence, ensuring each atomic statement is grounded in at least one retrieved doc-ument, enabling fine-grained evaluation of citation precision and coverage (Xia et al., 2025). 

## 6 Evaluation 

While the ultimate measure of an enterprise as-sistant’s success lies in user satisfaction , such metrics can only be meaningfully assessed post-deployment. During development, we therefore rely on proxy metrics that correlate with user trust and perceived reliability. Below, we describe the evaluation setup and results comparing our pro-posed approach with the two baseline methods in-troduced in Section 5. Due to space constraints, we report here only the comparative results with base-lines. A more detailed intrinsic evaluation of our method, including fine-grained analyses of align-ment and human relevance judgments, is provided in Appendix F. We also provide long-term post-deployment metrics and user satisfaction telemetry from a large-scale live production environment in Section 7 and metrics on latency in Section 8. 

6.1 Evaluating Groundedness (RQ1) 

To evaluate citation groundedness in relation to RQ1, we compute the following metrics: • %Hallucination: A binary indicator of whether an answer contains hallucinated citations. Since any hallucinated citation is unacceptable in en-terprise settings like ours, the score is 0 if all generated citations correspond to retrieved doc-uments, and 1 otherwise. Let c′ be the set of generated citations, c the set of retrieved urls 

and ⊮[·] equals 0 if true and 1 if false. Then:     

> Hallucination = ⊮c′⊆c(2)

• %Groundedness: A binary measure indicat-ing whether the model’s output is supported by at least one gold-annotated source document. Gold citations, provided by subject-matter ex-perts, identify documents sufficient but not ex-haustive to answer each test instance, as enumer-ating all valid sources is impractical in dynami-cally changing enterprise settings; therefore, we do not penalize citations not available in the gold set (see Appendix E for more details). Let c′

denote the set of generated citations and c the set of gold citations. Then:       

> Groundedness = ⊮c′∩c̸=∅(3)

where ⊮[·] equals 1 if there is an overlap between generated and gold citations, 0 otherwise. As shown in Table 2, EvidenT substantially improves factual groundedness and eliminates hal-lucinations across both model scales. We compute 95% confidence intervals using a binomial approx-imation of the standard error:                                                 

> p±1.96 ×
> rp(1 −p)
> n(4)
> Method %Groundedness ( ↑)%Hallucination ( ↓)
> M1 M2 M1 M2 Direct Prompting 52 ±4.473 ±3.931 ±4.118 ±3.4
> Ground Every Sentence 47 ±4.471 ±4.054 ±4.423 ±3.7
> EvidenT 77 ±3.7 ∗93 ±2.2 ∗0(≤0.6 )∗0(≤0.6 )∗

Table 2: Comparison of prompting strategies across verification metrics for models M1 and M2. ∗ denotes statistical significance at p < 0.05 compared to both baselines. 

Two-proportion z-tests confirm that EvidenT ’s gains are highly statistically significant at p < 0.05 

across all configurations. 

6.2 Evaluating Traceability (RQ2) 

We use both semantic and lexical post-generation metrics to quantify (pertaining to RQ2) how well a model-generated answer can be traced back to its source document. For all subsequent evaluations, we first extract factual statements by taking the text preceding each citation: for example, the blue and brown spans in Figure 2 illustrate two separate facts. For 

EvidenT , we additionally gather both the ex-tracted facts and their corresponding source pas-sages by matching cited urls . These are then com-pared against the content of the cited documents, identified through the same cited urls . Results are averaged across all queries. Given a reference document D and a model-generated answer A, we quantify how traceable A

is to D. We employ several methods to measure this. Let U and V denote the multisets of tokens from A and D, respectively. t denotes the token. 

6.2.1 Word Overlap 

Let O = P 

> t

min(count U (t), count V (t)) for each token t.         

> AnsCov =O
> |U|,DocFocus =O
> |V|(5)

AnsCov measures how well the document covers the answer content, while DocFocus reflects how concentrated the document is on that answer. 

6.2.2 n-gram Overlap 

For n ∈ { 2, 3, 5, 10 }, let Gn(T ) denote the multiset of n-grams in text T , and let In = |G n(A)∩G n(D)|

be the number of overlapping n-grams between the answer A and document D. We define AnsCov@n, which measures how much of the answer’s phras-ing is covered by the document, and DocFocus@n, which captures how concentrated the document is on the answer content. Larger n values prefer Method Model DocFocus AnsCov Focus@2 Cov@2 Focus@3 Cov@3 Focus@5 Cov@5 Focus@10 Cov@10                                                                

> Direct Prompting M1 0.053 0.733 0.031 0.457 0.025 0.377 0.021 0.331 0.014 0.292 M2 0.047 0.887 0.032 0.644 0.026 0.528 0.020 0.436 0.012 0.324 Ground Every Sentence M1 0.044 0.736 0.027 0.442 0.022 0.363 0.019 0.309 0.014 0.265 M2 0.039 0.897 0.028 0.655 0.023 0.536 0.018 0.431 0.011 0.328
> EvidenT M1 0.096 0.998 0.093 0.996 0.093 0.995 0.091 0.993 0.096 0.986
> M2 0.162 0.999 0.162 0.996 0.160 0.993 0.158 0.990 0.156 0.979

Table 3: Answer Coverage ( AnsCov ) and Document Focus ( DocFocus ) metrics across methods and models. Higher 

Coverage indicates that a document captures more of the generated answer’s content, while higher Focus reflects a greater proportion of the document being relevant to the answer. 

near-verbatim phrasing and reduce tolerance for paraphrasing.        

> AnsCov@ n=In
> |G n(A)|,DocFocus@ n=In
> |G n(D)|(6)

The results are presented in Table 3. The high AnsCov values and the low DocFocus values re-flect the long, noisy nature of the source docu-ments. EvidenT achieves substantial improve-ments in coverage over both baselines. We observe extremely high absolute values for our technique. The Alignment and Filtering module (Section 3.3) filters out hallucinated content, ensuring that the retained text is almost entirely verbatim. Further-more, when analyzing the AnsCov metric and the n-gram–based coverage at n = 10, we find that 

EvidenT achieves near-saturated scores. While AnsCov primarily reflects lexical overlap between generated answers and cited text, the n = 10 cov-erage provides a more stringent measure, focusing on longer exact matches in the source document. This not only validates that the generated spans are faithfully extracted from the evidence but also demonstrates that our method can accurately re-cover the exact supporting spans if needed, rein-forcing EvidenT ’s transparency and traceability advantages over the baselines. 

6.2.3 Semantic Matching 

For semantic scoring, we create overlapping win-dows (256 tokens, stride 50) for both A and D.We use the off-the-shelf cross-encoder to compute similarity scores between each answer {ai} and document window {dj }. The model jointly en-codes each text pair and outputs a scalar relevance score, which we use without normalization.          

> SemMax = max
> i,j s(ai, d j),(7) SemRecall =1
> |{ ai}|
> X
> i
> max
> js(ai, d j)(8)

where s(ai, d j ) denotes the raw relevance score produced by the cross-encoder. SemMax captures the strongest localized semantic match between the answer and the document, while SemRecall reflects the overall semantic coverage of A by D.                 

> Method SemMax SemRecall
> M1 M2 M1 M2 Direct Prompting 3.280 4.100 -0.390 1.930 Ground Every Sentence 4.168 4.320 0.439 2.360
> EvidenT 5.360 5.990 4.390 5.450

Table 4: Semantic similarity metrics comparing differ-ent model sizes. 

Table 4 shows that SemMax is consistently higher than SemRecall across all settings. This suggests that, for all model sizes and methods, the generated answers contain at least some portions that align well semantically with the corresponding documents. However, when semantic alignment is averaged across all answer segments (i.e., SemRe-call), M1 exhibits much weaker overall coverage. For M2, we observe that EvidenT achieves ap-proximately a 13% improvement in SemMax and more than a 100% improvement in SemRecall, in-dicating that EvidenT not only produces content with stronger localized matches but also maintains substantially better semantic consistency with the source documents overall. 

## 7 Post-Deployment Case Study 

While intrinsic development evaluations rely on proxy metrics, the ultimate validation of an enter-prise assistant lies in sustained utility and end-user trust after deployment. To assess this, we tracked a production-scale implementation of our frame-work over a five-month lifecycle. The deployment served more than 200 active internal users across distinct corporate functions distributed across mul-tiple geographies. In this live production environment, the cita-tion alignment and grounding improvements in-troduced by EvidenT helped mitigate the user friction points identified during our initial pilot. User experience outcomes were monitored through explicit interface telemetry: • Helpfulness Feedback : Binary thumbs-up/thumbs-down feedback attached to gen-erated responses showed a consistent +28% relative improvement over the baseline RAG implementation. • User-Rated Contextual Relevance : End users were asked to explicitly assess whether a response was relevant to the submitted query and retrieved context. This user-facing rele-vance signal improved by +19% over the de-ployment lifecycle, indicating that users more frequently perceived responses as aligned with their information needs. • User Retention : The architecture achieved a stable 90% user retention rate over the full five-month observation window, signaling robust system utility in day-to-day corporate workflows. These post-deployment measurements should be interpreted as user-experience indicators rather than isolated causal estimates. Live enterprise met-rics are inherently influenced by multiple system-level factors, including retrieval quality, interface design, user population, and workflow adoption. Nevertheless, the consistency between our deter-ministic grounding improvements and the observed gains in helpfulness, user-rated contextual rele-vance, and retention provides supporting evidence that tight, span-level citation tracking contributes to deployment readiness in high-stakes enterprise environments. 

## 8 Latency Considerations 

Compared to baseline RAG systems, our pipeline introduces a slight increase in end-to-end latency in exchange for substantial gains in groundedness and traceability. The baseline RAG system relies on a single long-context LLM generation and ex-hibits an average latency of approximately 10 ±

3 seconds per query. Our pipeline decomposes generation into two LLM calls and a lightweight alignment step. The first LLM call performs long-context passage extraction with latency compa-rable to baseline generation, followed by an n-gram–based alignment and filtering step with neg-ligible overhead. The final answer is generated using a much shorter context LLM call over dis-tilled passages. Overall, the end-to-end latency of our pipeline is approximately 12 ± 3 seconds per query. This increase of roughly 2 seconds repre-sents a more favorable trade-off than approaches that rely on multiple iterative LLM calls (Qian et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024), verifier-based reasoning, or domain-specific fine-tuning (Asai et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2025), which often incur significantly higher latency, cost, and operational complexity. 

## 9 Conclusion 

We presented EvidenT , a lightweight, model-agnostic framework that improves verifiability and traceability in extractive enterprise QA without re-training. Our method substantially reduces unveri-fiable output and enhances alignment between gen-erated responses and source content across model scales. While our work focuses on QA, the ap-proach is applicable to other generation tasks in enterprise settings that demand citation precision. 

## 10 Limitations 

Our work proposes a pipeline for producing more grounded and traceable citations in extractive en-terprise QA. It is designed specifically for the frag-mented, noisy, and heterogeneous data typical of enterprise environments, where model reasoning and assumption-making are discouraged to ensure factual precision. As a result, we do not evaluate on standard public benchmarks, which fail to cap-ture the complexity of such data. EvidenT is not intended for abstractive synthesis or paraphrase-heavy generation; extending the framework to sup-port higher-level abstraction while preserving span-level accountability is an important direction for future work. Our evaluation relies on semantic and lexical metrics as proxies for post-deployment out-comes like user satisfaction; future work includes controlled A/B testing to better estimate real-world impact. Additionally, our experiments focus ex-clusively on text-based modalities, with support for other modalities left to future work. Finally, we evaluate only open-weight models, as extensive testing with proprietary models is constrained by data privacy considerations. 

## 11 Ethical Considerations 

Deploying language models as enterprise assistants in high-stakes environments requires rigorous over-sight regarding data governance, misinformation, and human accountability. To address these con-cerns, EvidenT utilizes open-weight models to ensure strict data constraints and privacy consider-ations are respected. Furthermore, by enforcing a deterministic lexical alignment check, the pipeline eliminates citation hallucinations, actively prevent-ing the propagation of misinformation in critical domains like law, finance, and healthcare. Addi-tionally, the system alerts users within the interface that the provided answer is AI-generated and can be wrong. To counter the resulting risks of automa-tion bias and ensure users do not blindly trust the system, EvidenT integrates span-level traceabil-ity directly into the user interface, highlighting the exact source text so that the generation remains entirely transparent and user-verifiable. 

## References 

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Kartikay Bagla, Shivam Gupta, Ankit Kumar, and Anuj Gupta. 2023. Noisy text data: foible of popular trans-former based nlp models. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on AI-ML Systems , pages 1–5. Samuel Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference. In 

Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 632– 642. Andrew Brown, Muhammad Roman, and Barry De-vereux. 2025. A systematic literature review of retrieval-augmented generation: Techniques, metrics, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06401 .Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2024a. Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Zhiyu Zoey Chen, Jing Ma, Xinlu Zhang, Nan Hao, An Yan, Armineh Nourbakhsh, Xianjun Yang, Julian McAuley, Linda Petzold, and William Yang Wang. 2024b. A survey on large language models for crit-ical societal domains: Finance, healthcare, and law. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01769 .Prafulla Kumar Choubey, Xiangyu Peng, Shilpa Bha-gavath, Kung-Hsiang Huang, Caiming Xiong, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2025. Benchmarking deep search over heterogeneous enterprise data. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Industry Track) .Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6465–6488. Gaurav Ghosal, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Aditi Raghu-nathan. 2024. Understanding finetuning for factual knowledge extraction. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Zeyu Han, Chao Gao, Jinyang Liu, Jeff Zhang, and Sai Qian Zhang. 2024. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models: A comprehensive survey. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14608 .Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shan-tanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. 2024. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06654 .Lei Huang, Xiaocheng Feng, Weitao Ma, Yuxuan Gu, Weihong Zhong, Xiachong Feng, Weijiang Yu, Wei-hua Peng, Duyu Tang, Dandan Tu, and 1 others. 2024. Learning fine-grained grounded citations for attributed large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 14095–14113. Hailey Joren, Jianyi Zhang, Chun-Sung Ferng, Da-Cheng Juan, Ankur Taly, and Cyrus Rashtchian. 2025. Sufficient context: A new lens on retrieval augmented generation systems. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Wojciech Kryscinski, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2020. Evaluating the factual consistency of abstractive text summarization. In 

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul N. Bennett, and Marti A. Hearst. 2022. SummaC: Re-visiting NLI-based models for inconsistency detection in summa-rization. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 10:163–177. Zhan Peng Lee, Andre Lin, and Calvin Tan. 2025. Finetune-rag: Fine-tuning language models to re-sist hallucination in retrieval-augmented generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10792 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Jekaterina Novikova, Ondˇ rej Dušek, and Verena Rieser. 2017. Why we need new evaluation metrics for nlg. In EMNLP .Sarah Packowski, Inge Halilovic, Jenifer Schlotfeldt, and Trish Smith. 2024. Optimizing and evaluating enterprise retrieval-augmented generation (RAG): A content design perspective. In Proceedings of the 2024 8th International Conference on Advances in Artificial Intelligence , pages 162–167. Maya Patel and Aditi Anand. 2024. Factuality or fic-tion? benchmarking modern llms on ambiguous qa with citations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18051 .Vinzent Penzkofer and Timo Baumann. 2024. Evalu-ating and fine-tuning retrieval-augmented language models to generate text with accurate citations. In 

Proceedings of the 20th Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (KONVENS 2024) , pages 57–64. Haosheng Qian, Yixing Fan, Jiafeng Guo, Ruqing Zhang, Qi Chen, Dawei Yin, and Xueqi Cheng. 2025. Vericite: Towards reliable citations in retrieval-augmented generation via rigorous verification. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval in the Asia Pacific Region ,pages 47–54. Hannah Rashkin, David Reitter, Gaurav Singh Tomar, and Dipanjan Das. 2021. Increasing faithfulness in knowledge-grounded dialogue with controllable features. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 704–718. Dongyu Ru, Lin Qiu, Xiangkun Hu, Tianhang Zhang, Peng Shi, Shuaichen Chang, Cheng Jiayang, Cunx-iang Wang, Shichao Sun, Huanyu Li, and 1 others. 2024. Ragchecker: A fine-grained framework for di-agnosing retrieval-augmented generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:21999– 22027. Chaitanya Sharma. 2025. Retrieval-augmented gener-ation: A comprehensive survey of architectures, en-hancements, and robustness frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00054 .Ronit Singal, Pransh Patwa, Parth Patwa, Aman Chadha, and Amitava Das. 2024. Evidence-backed fact check-ing using rag and few-shot in-context learning with llms. In Proceedings of the Seventh Fact Extraction and VERification Workshop (FEVER) , pages 91–98. Heydar Soudani, Evangelos Kanoulas, and Faegheh Ha-sibi. 2024. Fine tuning vs. retrieval augmented gener-ation for less popular knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval in the Asia Pacific Region , pages 12–22. Hao Sun, Hengyi Cai, Bo Wang, Yingyan Hou, Xiaochi Wei, Shuaiqiang Wang, Yan Zhang, and Dawei Yin. 2024. Towards verifiable text generation with evolv-ing memory and self-reflection. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8211–8227. Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. 2024. Minicheck: Efficient fact-checking of llms on ground-ing documents. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8818–8847. Amjad Umar, George Karabatis, Linda Ness, Bruce Horowitz, and Ahmed Elmagardmid. 1999. Enter-prise data quality: A pragmatic approach. Informa-tion Systems Frontiers , 1(3):279–301. Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122. Sirui Xia, Xintao Wang, Jiaqing Liang, Yifei Zhang, Weikang Zhou, Jiaji Deng, Fei Yu, and Yanghua Xiao. 2025. Ground every sentence: Improving retrieval-augmented LLMs with interleaved reference-claim generation. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 969– 988. Yuchen Xia, Jiho Kim, Yuhan Chen, Haojie Ye, Souvik Kundu, Cong Callie Hao, and Nishil Talati. 2024. Understanding the performance and estimating the cost of llm fine-tuning. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC) ,pages 210–223. IEEE. Yumo Xu, Peng Qi, Jifan Chen, Kunlun Liu, Rujun Han, Lan Liu, Bonan Min, Vittorio Castelli, Arshit Gupta, and Zhiguo Wang. 2025. Citeeval: Principle-driven citation evaluation for source attribution. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 32759–32778. Jialin Yang, Dongfu Jiang, Lipeng He, Sherman Siu, Yuxuan Zhang, Disen Liao, Zhuofeng Li, Huaye Zeng, Yiming Jia, Haozhe Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Structeval: Benchmarking llms’ capabili-ties to generate structural outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20139 .Linyi Yang, Yaoxian Song, Xuan Ren, Chenyang Lyu, Yidong Wang, Jingming Zhuo, Lingqiao Liu, Jindong Wang, Jennifer Foster, and Yue Zhang. 2023. Out-of-distribution generalization in natural language pro-cessing: Past, present, and future. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 4533–4559. Tianjun Zhang, Shishir G. Patil, Naman Jain, Sheng Shen, Matei Zaharia, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gon-zalez. 2024. RAFT: Adapting language models to domain-specific rag. In Conference on Language Modeling .Appendix A Pilot Deployment 

The assistant was powered by a state-of-the-art large language model 1 and implemented using a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) architecture tailored for enterprise contexts. For each user query, the system retrieved the top n documents from a heterogeneous corpus of internal enterprise sources, including wikis, policy manuals, knowledge base articles, and product documentation, using a cus-tomized retrieval backend optimized for latency and format diversity. Retrieved documents were incorporated into the model’s context using a task-specific prompt, guiding the model to generate natural language responses with inline citations grounded in the source content (see Appendix B for prompt details). The pilot was deployed for one month to a cohort of 55 users across roles such as support, operations, compliance, and product management. Users sub-mitted queries in real time as part of their daily workflows, and the assistant generated responses synchronously through a live interface. In total, the system processed approximately 4,000 queries covering a wide range of topics, including trou-bleshooting procedures and internal policy clarifi-cation. This deployment surfaced valuable insights into real-world assistant usage in enterprise environ-ments. While users appreciated the fluency and relevance of the responses, as well as the promise of citation-backed justifications, they frequently en-countered critical failure modes such as incorrect citations, untraceable references, and unsupported factual claims. 

## B Prompts for the pilot deployment 

B.1 System Prompt 

You are an expert Enterprise Assistant that uses retrieval-augmented generation to answer questions. For each question, you are provided with a list of documents from different sources. Retrieve the most appropriate information and craft a clear, accurate response. Only provide the answer based on the text from the documents provided. 

> 1As this information is internal, we’re not able to disclose additional details.

Instructions: 1. Cite the url of the document(s) used in your response with reference numbers in brackets (e.g., [1], [2]). Place these references only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . Do not include references in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. 2. At the end of your answer, include a ‘References’ section listing the urls 

corresponding to the cited numbers. Each 

url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. 3. Avoid referring to documents with identifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the urls .4. If the question cannot be answered accurately using the documents, reply with: ‘Not sufficient information to answer.’ Provide no additional information or references in this case. Here are the documents: 

context 

B.2 User Prompt 

Answer the following question: query 

Instructions: 1. Cite the url of the document(s) used in your response with reference numbers in brackets (e.g., [1], [2]). Place these references only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . Do not include references in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. 2. At the end of your answer, include a ‘References’ section listing the urls 

corresponding to the cited numbers. Each 

url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. 3. Avoid referring to documents with identifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the urls .4. If the question cannot be answered accurately using the documents, reply with: ‘Not sufficient information to answer.’ Provide no additional information or references in this case. Example response format: Answer text. [1], [2]. Answer text. [3]. References: [1] url of document 1 [2] url of document 2 [3] url of document 3 Answer the question only from the references. Ensure all cited urls are in-cluded in the References section, and avoid mentioning specific document identifiers (e.g., ‘DOCUMENT X’). 

## C Prompts for off-the-shelf techniques 

C.1 Direct-Prompting 

You are a helpful question-answering assistant. Classify the user query into one of the following categories and respond accord-ingly using only the documentContent 

and documentMetadata fields from the provided documents. Do not make assumptions, inferences, or use any external knowledge. If the answer is not directly stated in the documents, follow the instruc-tions given below carefully. 

Think you are the reader of the an-swer. The answer should be clear, concise and well formatted. Ensure that it communicates effectively and presents the information in a structured and readable manner. 

## Categories & Response Instructions 

1. Informational Questions 

Fact-based queries about what, who, where, when, or whether something exists. These are easy queries which do not require knowledge of complex relationships to be answered. Examples: • What is <product_name>? • Where is <product_name>? • Do we have any information on <prod-uct_name>? • Tell me about <product_name> • When is <product_name>used? • Who is <name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), respond directly. Assign each source a unique citation number as shown below. Insert the cita-tion number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sentences. Place these numbers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . A number can appear multiple times if the correspond-ing source contains information sup-porting multiple sentences. Do not in-clude reference numbers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, in-clude a ‘References’ section listing the 

urls corresponding to the cited num-bers. Each url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid referring to documents with iden-tifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, provide a summarization of relevant information from the documents. • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in mul-tiple documents, state it only once and cite all relevant sources after the sen-tence as [X][Y] where X, Y correspond to citation numbers as described above. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .• Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Format lists, sequences, or comma-separated entities into bullets using the following format: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: What is FEATURE? Response: FEATURE is a feature that allows client devices to sync specific data subsets locally for offline use. It supports both full and incremental sync options based on user-defined criteria. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page1 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: What is PRODUCT? Response: PRODUCT integrates with data gateways to enhance data processing efficiency. [1] It includes components that support both historical and real-time data ingestion. [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 Note: The above is a summarization of relevant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

2. Analytical Questions 

Queries asking for reasons, comparisons, summaries, or relational understanding (including "why" questions). Examples: • Why is <product_name> used? • How is <product1> different from <product2>? • What are the differences between <p1> and <p2>? • Can you summarize <product_name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), return an explana-tion. Assign each source a unique cita-tion number. Insert the citation number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sentences. Place these num-bers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . A number can appear mul-tiple times if the corresponding source contains information supporting multi-ple sentences. Do not include reference numbers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, include a ‘Refer-ences’ section listing the urls corre-sponding to the cited numbers. Each 

url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid refer-ring to documents with identifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state what the query is asking. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [1] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in mul-tiple documents, state it once and cite all sources. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the URL. • Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • If comparing two products, use the format: The key differences between <prod-uct1> and <product2> are as follows: Product1: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. [1]> Product2: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. [2]> References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • Format lists and breakdowns using bullets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves multiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-Context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 delivers data with com-pression and prioritization for bandwidth optimization. [1] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time market data with minimal latency. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page2 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 is used in real-time data processing. [1] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time data with minimal latency. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 The above is a summarization of rele-vant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

3. Application Questions 

Queries about how to do something, imple-mentation, limits, entitlements, or support. These include complex queries and may require knowledge of complex relationships between products to be answered. Examples: • Can I <action>? • How do I <action>? • What are the limits of <product>? • Is <product> supported? • Does <feature> work with <product>? • Are there entitlements for <tool>? • Is <product1> required for <prod-uct2>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), respond directly. Assign each source a unique citation number as shown below. Insert the cita-tion number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sentences. Place these numbers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . A number can appear multiple times if the correspond-ing source contains information sup-porting multiple sentences. Do not in-clude reference numbers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, in-clude a ‘References’ section listing the 

urls corresponding to the cited num-bers. Each url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid referring to documents with iden-tifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [1] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Provide a complete answer. If the response requires multiple steps or examples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .Final output must match: 

– Use bullets [*] to structure any steps, behaviors, or options. 

– Format lists and breakdowns us-ing bullets: * Item · Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has product1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: Can a client replay data from the real-time feed if data is missed? Response: A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various reasons. Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: Can I schedule auto-replay every 5 minutes? Response: The documentation does not explicitly state if auto-replay can be scheduled every 5 minutes. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: • A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various rea-sons. These reasons could be reason1, reason2. [1] • Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 Note: Please preface the relevant in-formation from document with: The documentation does not explic-itly state <query content>. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: <relevant information from document related to query>. Do not include any reference num-bers after "The documentation does not explicitly state <query content>". —

## Formatting and Style Rules 

• Use only information directly from documentContent or 

documentMetadata .• Do not infer, assume, or rephrase mean-ing beyond what is written. • Cite the documentUrl after every sentence using [1], [2], [3], etc. Repeat the url even if from the same docu-ment. Always only add the [1] at the end of sentence. • If multiple documents provide the same information, cite them all after the sen-tence: [1][2]. • Format all lists, sequences, or grouped items using bullets [*], including nested bullets. Make sure each bullet has a new line after. • Maintain a neutral, factual tone. • Ensure the final answer is concise ,clear, well formatted, and easy to fol-low for a reader. • Format lists and breakdowns using bul-lets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. • Keep the answer concise. • Irrespective of the query type, if there is no information directly applicable, please preface any relevant information from document with The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: <relevant information from docu-ment related to query>. Here are the reference documents: Documents: context C.2 Ground Every Sentence 

You are a helpful question-answering assistant. Classify the user query into one of the following categories and respond accord-ingly using only the documentContent 

and documentMetadata fields from the provided documents. Do not make assumptions, inferences, or use any external knowledge. If the answer is not directly stated in the documents, follow the instruc-tions given below carefully. 

Think you are the reader of the an-swer. The answer should be clear, concise and well formatted. Ensure that it communicates effectively and presents the information in a structured and readable manner. 

## Categories & Response Instructions 

1. Informational Questions 

Fact-based queries about what, who, where, when, or whether something exists. These are easy queries which do not require knowledge of complex relationships to be answered. Examples: • What is <product_name>? • Where is <product_name>? • Do we have any information on <prod-uct_name>? • Tell me about <product_name> • When is <product_name>used? • Who is <name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), respond directly. Assign each source a unique citation number as shown below. Every sen-tence must be supported by a citation. Insert the citation number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sen-tences. Place these numbers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) .A number can appear multiple times if the corresponding source contains information supporting multiple sen-tences. Do not include reference num-bers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, include a ‘Refer-ences’ section listing the urls corre-sponding to the cited numbers. Each 

url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid refer-ring to documents with identifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, provide a summarization of relevant information from the documents. • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in mul-tiple documents, state it only once and cite all relevant sources after the sen-tence as [X][Y] where X, Y correspond to citation numbers as described above. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the URL. • Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Format lists, sequences, or comma-separated entities into bullets using the following format: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: What is PRODUCT? Response: PRODUCT is a feature that allows client devices to sync specific data subsets locally for offline use. [1] It supports both full and incremental sync options based on user-defined criteria. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page1 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: What is PRODUCT? Response: PRODUCT integrates with market gateways to enhance data processing efficiency. [1] It includes components that support both historical and real-time data ingestion. [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 Note: The above is a summarization of relevant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

2. Analytical Questions 

Queries asking for reasons, comparisons, summaries, or relational understanding (including "why" questions). Examples: • Why is <product_name> used? • How is <product1> different from <product2>? • What are the differences between <p1> and <p2>? • Can you summarize <product_name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), return an explana-tion. Assign each source a unique cita-tion number. Every sentence must be supported by a citation. Insert the cita-tion number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sentences. Place these numbers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) . A number can appear multiple times if the correspond-ing source contains information sup-porting multiple sentences. Do not in-clude reference numbers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, in-clude a ‘References’ section listing the 

urls corresponding to the cited num-bers. Each url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid referring to documents with iden-tifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state what the query is asking. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [1] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in mul-tiple documents, state it once and cite all sources. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .• Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • If comparing two products, use the format: The key differences between <prod-uct1> and <product2> are as follows: Product1: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. [1]> Product2: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. [2]> References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • Format lists and breakdowns using bullets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves multiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-Context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 delivers data with com-pression and prioritization for bandwidth optimization. [1] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time data with minimal latency. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page2 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 is used in real-time data processing. [1] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time market data with minimal latency. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 Here, the above is a summarization of relevant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

3. Application Questions 

Queries about how to do something, imple-mentation, limits, entitlements, or support. These include complex queries and may require knowledge of complex relationships between products to be answered. Examples: • Can I <action>? • How do I <action>? • What are the limits of <product>? • Is <product> supported? • Does <feature> work with <product>? • Are there entitlements for <tool>? • Is <product1> required for <prod-uct2>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available in the pro-vided document(s), respond directly. Assign each source a unique citation number as shown below. Every sen-tence must be supported by a citation. Insert the citation number (in brackets, e.g. [1], [2]) directly after relevant sen-tences. Place these numbers only at the end of the relevant sentence(s) .A number can appear multiple times if the corresponding source contains information supporting multiple sen-tences. Do not include reference num-bers in the middle of a sentence or as part of the sentence structure. At the end of your answer, include a ‘Refer-ences’ section listing the urls corre-sponding to the cited numbers. Each 

url should be listed only once, even if referenced multiple times. Avoid refer-ring to documents with identifiers like ‘DOCUMENT X’; instead, cite only the reference numbers. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [1] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [2] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page7 [2] https://docs.example.com/page9 • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Provide a complete answer. If the response requires multiple steps or examples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the URL. Final output must match: 

– Use bullets [*] to structure any steps, behaviors, or options. 

– Format lists and breakdowns us-ing bullets: * Item · Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has product1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: Can a client replay data from the real-time feed if data is missed? Response: A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various reasons. [1] Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: Can I schedule auto-replay every 5 minutes? Response: The documentation does not explicitly state if auto-replay can be scheduled every 5 minutes. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: • A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various rea-sons. These reasons could be reason1, reason2. [1] • Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [1] References: [1] https://docs.example.com/page3 Note: Please preface the relevant in-formation from document with: The documentation does not explic-itly state <query content>. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: <relevant information from document related to query>. Do not include any reference num-bers after "The documentation does not explicitly state <query content>". —

## Formatting and Style Rules 

• Use only information directly from documentContent or 

documentMetadata .• Do not infer, assume, or rephrase mean-ing beyond what is written. • Cite the documentUrl after every sentence using [1], [2], [3], etc. Repeat the url even if from the same docu-ment. Always only add the [1] at the end of sentence. • If multiple documents provide the same information, cite them all after the sen-tence: [1][2]. • Format all lists, sequences, or grouped items using bullets [*], including nested bullets. Make sure each bullet has a new line after. • Maintain a neutral, factual tone. • Ensure the final answer is concise ,clear, well formatted, and easy to fol-low for a reader. • Format lists and breakdowns using bul-lets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. • Keep the answer concise. • Irrespective of the query type, if there is no information directly applicable, please preface any relevant information from document with The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: <relevant information from docu-ment related to query>. Here are the reference documents: Documents: context 

## D Prompts for EvidenT 

D.1 Prompts for the Structured Passage Extraction Module D.1.1 System Prompt 

Role: You are an Enterprise Data assistant. Task: You will receive: 1. A user message from a client about products, API, or function support. 2. A list of retrieved documents, each containing a url , sourcetype, and content. Your task is to analyze the retrieved documents to find relevant information and summarize them to address the client inquiry in the user message. You must first determine document passages that provide a partial or complete relation to the user message. Partial answers can be stitched together to provide the complete answer. This step is only for collecting any relevant information to the user message. Do not use any information that is not available in the retrieved documents. Following are the documents: 

context 

D.1.2 User Prompt 

Your goal is to generate a structured JSON response by: Step 1: Extracting Relevant Passages 1. Identify all directly relevant passages from the documents that fully or partially relate to the user message. 2. Each passage can have multiple sentences. It must include all formatting and characters 

exactly as present in the original document (including special characters such as \n, \t, \r, \x0b, and Unicode symbols). 3. Do NOT paraphrase, normalize, or reformat any part of the passage. Preserve spacing, escape characters, line breaks, tabs, and control characters exactly as in the source. 4. Copy passages verbatim character-for-character .Important: - Do not infer or assume. Passages must be exact substrings of the document content. - If a passage contains special or non-printable characters, these must appear exactly as-is in the output. - Do not strip whitespace or escape charac-ters. Step 2: Structuring the Response 1.Store all extracted snippets under “col-lected_passages" with a unique passage_id, the exact text, and the document url from which the passages are taken. Do not generate content beyond what is word to word given explicitly retrieved from documents. Here is an example for reference. Example Response Format (JSON): {"collected_passages": [ {"passage_id": "1", "passage": "The API provides topic strings for new issues feed, including ‘REDACTED’ and ‘REDACTED’. The API also gives word strings for new issues feed and others.", "url": "https://example.com/doc1" }, {"passage_id": "2", "passage": "‘REDACTED’ is a topic available via services. value adds is a topic available via services.", "url": "https://example.com/doc2" }]}If No Relevant Passages Exist: {"collected_passages": [] }Ensure that document passages are verbatim from the documents provided. Do not make up new information or hallucinate. Here is the user message: 

query D.2 Prompts for the Answer Generation Module D.2.1 System Prompt 

You are a helpful question-answering assistant. Classify the user query into one of the following categories and respond accord-ingly using only the documentContent 

and documentMetadata fields from the provided documents. Do not make assumptions, inferences, or use any external knowledge. If the answer is not directly stated in the documents, follow the instruc-tions given below carefully. 

Think you are the reader of the an-swer. The answer should be clear, concise and well formatted. Ensure that it communicates effectively and presents the information in a structured and readable manner. 

## Categories & Response Instructions 

1. Informational Questions 

Fact-based queries about what, who, where, when, or whether something exists. These are easy queries which do not require knowledge of complex relationships to be answered. Examples: • What is <product_name>? • Where is <product_name>? • Do we have any information on <prod-uct_name>? • Tell me about <product_name> • When is <product_name>used? • Who is <name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available, respond di-rectly and cite the ‘documentUrl‘ after every sentence in [documenturl]. Al-ways only add the [documentUrl] at the end of sentence. • If the answer is not explicitly available, provide a summarization of relevant information from the documents. • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in multiple documents, state it only once and cite all relevant sources after the sentence as [docu-ment1_url][document2_url]. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .• Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Format lists, sequences, or comma-separated entities into bullets using the following format: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: What is PRODUCT? Response: PRODUCT is a feature that al-lows client devices to sync specific data subsets locally for offline use. [https://docs.example.com/page1] It sup-ports both full and incremental sync options based on user-defined criteria. [https://docs.example.com/page1] 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document User Query: What is PRODUCT? Response: PRODUCT integrates with market gateways to enhance data processing efficiency. [https://docs.example.com/page7] It in-cludes components that support both historical and real-time data ingestion. [https://docs.example.com/page9] Note: The above is a summarization of relevant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

2. Analytical Questions 

Queries asking for reasons, comparisons, summaries, or relational understanding (including "why" questions). Examples: • Why is <product_name> used? • How is <product1> different from <product2>? • What are the differences between <p1> and <p2>? • Can you summarize <product_name>? Response Rules: • If the answer is available return an ex-planation and cite the ‘documentUrl‘ after every sentence in [documentUrl]. Always only add the [documentUrl] at the end of sentence. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state what the query is asking. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [documen-tUrl] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [documen-tUrl] • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • If similar information appears in mul-tiple documents, state it once and cite all sources. • Provide a complete answer. If the re-sponse requires multiple steps or exam-ples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .• Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • If comparing two products, use the format: The key differences between <prod-uct1> and <product2> are as follows: Product1: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. Cite each sentence with [documentUrl]> Product2: <Summarize concisely relevant content from document. Cite each sentence with [documentUrl]> • Format lists and breakdowns using bullets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves multiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-Context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 delivers data with compres-sion and prioritization for bandwidth opti-mization. [https://docs.example.com/page2] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time market data with minimal latency. [https://docs.example.com/page2] 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: What are the differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2? Response: The key differences between PRODUCT_1 and PRODUCT_2 are as follows: PRODUCT_1: PRODUCT_1 is used in real-time data pro-cessing. [https://docs.example.com/page3] PRODUCT_2: PRODUCT_2 provides raw, uncompressed real-time market data with minimal latency. [https://docs.example.com/page2] Here, the above is a summarization of relevant details from the documents (Don’t add this statement in the generation) —

3. Application Questions 

Queries about how to do something, imple-mentation, limits, entitlements, or support. These include complex queries and may require knowledge of complex relationships between products to be answered. Examples: • Can I <action>? • How do I <action>? • What are the limits of <product>? • Is <product> supported? • Does <feature> work with <product>? • Are there entitlements for <tool>? • Is <product1> required for <prod-uct2>? Response Rules: • If the answer is explicitly available in the documents, provide the instruction as stated and cite the ‘documentUrl‘ af-ter each sentence in [documentUrl]. Al-ways only add the [documentUrl] at the end of sentence. • If the answer is not explicitly available, respond with: The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: 

– <Relevant detail 1> [documen-tUrl] 

– <Relevant detail 2> [documen-tUrl] • For complex topics, provide a high-level overview first, then break down into steps. • Keep the response to the point and con-cise. Avoid repetitive information. • Provide a complete answer. If the response requires multiple steps or examples, include them explicitly—do not simply reference the url .Final output must match: 

– Use bullets [*] to structure any steps, behaviors, or options. 

– Format lists and breakdowns us-ing bullets: * Item · Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has product1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. In-context Examples: 

Example - Answer Stated in Docu-ment 

User Query: Can a client replay data from the real-time feed if data is missed? Response: A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various rea-sons. [https://docs.example.com/page3] Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [https://docs.example.com/page3] 

Example - Answer NOT Explicitly Stated in Document 

User Query: Can I schedule auto-replay every 5 minutes? Response: The documentation does not explicitly state if auto-replay can be scheduled every 5 minutes. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: • A client application may miss data from the real-time feed for various reasons. These rea-sons could be reason1, reason2. [https://docs.example.com/page3] • Once detected, the client application can request to replay the missed data via the appropriate replay service. [https://docs.example.com/page3] Note: Please preface the relevant informa-tion from document with: The documentation does not explic-itly state <query content>. Here are some details from the docu-mentation which may help: <relevant information from document related to query>. Do not include any reference num-bers after "The documentation does not explicitly state <query content>". —

## Formatting and Style Rules 

• Use only information directly from documentContent or 

documentMetadata .• Do not infer, assume, or rephrase mean-ing beyond what is written. • Cite the documentUrl after every sentence using [documentUrl], etc. Re-peat the url even if from the same document. Always only add the [docu-mentUrl] at the end of sentence. • If multiple documents provide the same information, cite them all after the sentence: [docu-ment1_url][document2_url]. • Format all lists, sequences, or grouped items using bullets [*], including nested bullets. Make sure each bullet has a new line after. • Maintain a neutral, factual tone. • Ensure the final answer is concise ,clear, well formatted, and easy to fol-low for a reader. • Format lists and breakdowns using bul-lets: 

– Item * Sub-item • If the generation process involves mul-tiple steps or examples (separated by commas), present them as a bulleted list. For example, if a sentence has prod-uct1, product2, product3, make them into: 

– product 1 

– product 2 

– product 3 • Any sentence following the bullet points should begin on a new line. • Keep the answer concise. • Irrespective of the query type, if there is no information directly applicable, please preface any relevant information from document with The documentation does not ex-plicitly state <query content>. Here are some details from the documentation which may help: <relevant information from docu-ment related to query>. Here are the reference documents: Documents: context 

D.2.2 User Prompt 

Please answer the following: User Query: query 

D.3 Prompt for the LLM-as-judge Entailment D.3.1 System Prompt 

You are a helpful assistant. 

D.3.2 User Prompt INSTRUCTIONS: 

Your task is to generate a JSON ob-ject to determine whether the Source Text 

entails or supports the Target Text —that is, whether the Target Text is attributable, logically implied, or factually faithful to the Source Text. The JSON will have 3 fields: ’label’ ,

’reason and ’confidence_score’ .The label field has three choices: • Yes — The Source Text fully entails or supports the Target Text. • Partial — The Source Text only par-tially entails or supports the Target Text. • No — The Source Text does not entail or support the Target Text. Please provide a reason and a

confidence_score between 0 and 1 describing how confident you are about the label. 

IMPORTANT: Please make sure to only return in JSON format. 

EXAMPLES: Example 1 

Source Text: “Restarting the Kubernetes pods after updating the ConfigMap ensures the new configuration is applied.” Target Text: “You need to restart the pods to apply the new ConfigMap settings.” 

{{ "label": "Yes", 

"reason": "The target text is a clear rephrasing of the source, fully supported by it.", "confidence_score": 0.6 }} 

Example 2 

Source Text: “The login failure was caused by a misconfigured OAuth redirect URI.” Target Text: “The authentication system is broken.” 

{{ "label": "Partial", 

"reason": "The target generalizes the failure to the whole system, which is not fully justified.", "confidence_score": 0.9 }} 

Example 3 

Source Text: “ DELETE /user/{{id}} 

removes the user from the database but retains audit logs.” Target Text: “DELETE /user/{{id}} 

permanently erases all user data with no trace.” 

{{ "label": "No", 

"reason": "The target contradicts the source by ignoring the retention of audit logs.", "confidence_score": 0.3 }} ===== END OF EXAMPLE ====== 

CONTEXT: 

Source Text: { source_text }Target Text: { target_text }

JSON: 

## E Construction of our gold dataset for measuring Groundedness 

To evaluate groundedness, we construct a gold set of supporting documents for each test instance us-ing subject-matter experts (SMEs). Given a ques-tion and access to the full universe of enterprise documents, SMEs were asked to identify docu-ments that are sufficient to support a correct answer. SMEs were not instructed to produce an exhaus-tive set of all possible supporting documents. In large enterprise environments, a single question can often be answered by multiple documents orig-inating from different data sources (e.g., internal wikis, reports, tickets, or knowledge bases). Enu-merating all valid supporting documents in such a heterogeneous and continuously evolving docu-ment universe is a challenging and time-consuming problem. As a result, constructing an exhaustive gold set is often impractical under realistic time and resource constraints. Accordingly, the resulting gold dataset is inten-tionally non-exhaustive : it contains one or more SME-identified documents that are sufficient to an-swer the question, but does not aim to cover all valid sources. This design choice directly informs our groundedness metric. Specifically, we do not penalize generated citations that are not present in the gold set, since their absence does not im-ply that they are invalid or ungrounded. Instead, overlap with the gold set is treated as a positive signal, indicating that the model has cited at least one SME-verified supporting document. The same gold dataset and groundedness metric are applied uniformly across all baselines and our proposed approach. Practitioners working with more static document collections, or those able to curate exhaustive gold annotations, may adopt more conservative evaluation protocols. M1 M2                

> %hallucinated 0.0 0.0 %drift in url 24.19 13.5 %partially hallucinated 16.4 0.6
> Table 5: N-gram metrics for models M1:
> LLaMA-3.1-8B and M2: LLaMA-3.3-70B

## F Intrinsic Evaluation of EvidenT 

F.1 N-gram Entailment 

These are the results from the Alignment and Fil-tering Module (Section 3.3). The goal is to assess whether the passages generated in this module are factually aligned with the retrieved reference docu-ments or not. To this end, we quantify three specific error categories: hallucinations , url drift , and par-tial hallucinations .• %hallucinated: The percentage of generated passages that don’t contain any information supported by any reference source. • %drift in url : The percentage of cases where the generated url deviates from the ground-truth or reference url , indicating pos-sible citation drift. • %partially hallucinated: The percentage of generated passages that are partially correct but contain one or more hallucinations. As shown in Table 5, we observe a considerable amount of citation drift. However, we are able to locate the correct citation within the retrieved docu-ments that matches the passage and substitute it ac-cordingly. While we do not observe any instances of complete hallucination, partial hallucinations are present, particularly in the smaller model. The larger model demonstrates stronger factual ground-ing, exhibiting significantly fewer partially hallu-cinated passages. Notably, when hallucinations do occur, the initial portion of the generated response is often accurate, but as the generation continues, it gradually diverges from the source material. By identifying, correcting, or filtering such passages at this stage, the alignment and filtering step prevents hallucinations and citation drift from propagating to subsequent stages of the pipeline, thereby reduc-ing the risk of ungrounded content appearing in the final generated answer. 

F.2 Human Evaluation of Generated Passages 

After generating the source passages (Section 3.2) and processing them through the alignment check (Section 3.3), we conducted human evaluation to assess the relevance of the passages to the origi-nal queries. Evaluating relevance required subject-matter expertise , a capability that current large lan-guage models (LLMs) do not inherently possess. We experimented with using an LLM as a judge but observed a low correlation with human judgments (Pearson’s r = 0.3). This discrepancy likely stems from the highly specialized nature of our domain, which demands a broad and nuanced understanding of the underlying concepts to accurately determine relevance. We define a passage as relevant if its content is directly and entirely related to answering the query, without extraneous or unrelated information. Apassage is labeled partially relevant if it contains information that supports answering the query but also includes additional content that is not strictly necessary for answering it. All remaining passages, which do not contribute to answering the query, are considered non-relevant . While partially relevant passages contain superfluous information, we treat them as a positive signal in our evaluation, as enter-prise documents often embed relevant information within longer, noisy, or multi-topic passages. Im-portantly, our pipeline does not require all retrieved passages to be fully relevant. As long as the sys-tem retrieves passages containing the necessary supporting information, subsequent stages of the pipeline distill and select only the relevant content to construct a coherent final answer. Table 6 presents, for each query, the number of passages that evaluators judged as fully or par-tially relevant, which we then averaged across all queries. Two annotators reviewed 50 queries and corresponding passages, and we compute the final score by averaging their judgments.      

> M1 M2
> %Relevant 42 59 %Partially relevant 58 87
> Table 6: Human evaluation results of passage relevance for models M1 and M2.

We observe that the smaller model produces a higher proportion of irrelevant passages compared to the larger model. The larger model consistently produces a greater number of passages that are ei-ther fully or partially relevant. Both models demon-strate the ability to surface passages relevant to the query even from noisy and unstructured documents, indicating that the overall pipeline is effective at identifying meaningful content despite input noise. G Hyperparameter Ablation on Alignment and Filtering 

To isolate the effects of the lexical validation step, we conduct an ablation study over the key hyper-parameters of the Alignment and Filtering Module (Section 3.3): the n-gram size ( n) and the overlap threshold ( t). All experiments are performed us-ing our strongest model configuration (M2). We evaluate performance across three primary metrics: • Retention Rate ( ↑): The fraction of extracted passages preserved after filtering, measur-ing evidence recall. Truncated passages are counted as retained as they preserve supported content while shedding unsupported text. • % Hallucination (Pre / Post-Filter) ( ↓): The percentage of partially unsupported content (n-gram overlap ratio < t ) evaluated before and after applying the threshold check. • Cov@10 ( ↑): The fraction of answer 10-grams appearing in the cited document, cap-turing strict sentence-level traceability. As shown in Table 7, the parameters (n, t ) gov-ern a direct operational trade-off: increasing t en-forces stricter filtering that drives down residual hallucinated text but decreases overall evidence re-tention. Concurrently, expanding the window size 

n tightens the strictness of the lexical matching con-straint. Based on these results, we choose n = 5 

and t = 0 .7 as our production configuration, yield-ing a high retention rate ( 0.91 ) while compressing post-filter hallucinations to a negligible 0.6% and maximizing span traceability (Cov@10 = 0 .999 ). 

## H Extended Comparison with Advanced Verification Frameworks 

While advanced verification frameworks represent the state-of-the-art on public benchmarks, they are subject to strict architectural, operational, and data privacy constraints in enterprise production envi-ronments. Below, we detail the core limitations that prevent these frameworks from being utilized as inline production baselines: 

H.1 Model Fine-Tuning Constraints 

Frameworks such as Self-RAG (Asai et al., 2024) require specialized fine-tuning to train models. Re-training these models to accommodate custom tokens is computationally heavy. It is common for industry applications not to have the data and compute resources required for full model fine-tuning, which remains computationally expensive and resource-intensive for large-scale language models (Han et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024). 

H.2 Inference Latency and Real-Time SLAs 

Many academic verification architectures rely on multi-pass generation, iterative self-correction loops, or external Natural Language Inference (NLI) models to validate each extracted claim, as seen in VeriRAG (Sun et al., 2024), VeriCite (Qian et al., 2025), and MiniCheck (Tang et al., 2024). Under production service-level agreements (SLAs) for real-time user query support, the resulting 2×

to 3× increase in inference time is operationally un-feasible. EvidenT maintains high throughput by utilizing single-pass verification via deterministic 

n-gram alignment, introducing a minor ∼2-second latency overhead. 

H.3 Offline vs. Online Evaluation 

Comprehensive auditing frameworks like RAGChecker (Ru et al., 2024) are optimized for offline benchmarking, frequently invoking large language models as judges to score alignment retrospectively. Propagating an LLM-as-a-judge mechanism into an inline, real-time production pipeline to check every retrieved span introduces substantial API call overhead, increased cost, and execution bottlenecks, rendering online deployment impractical. 

H.4 Domain Sensitivity and Out-of-Distribution Data 

Publicly available, model-based NLI and verifi-cation checkpoints are typically trained on broad-coverage benchmark corpora such as SNLI and MultiNLI, which are constructed from image cap-tions or crowd-sourced general-domain sentence pairs rather than enterprise technical reposito-ries (Bowman et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2018). Enterprise repositories contain highly specialized, fragmented, and noisy technical data that can be markedly out-of-distribution (OOD) for such sec-ondary verifiers; prior work shows that NLP mod-els often suffer degraded generalization under do-main shift and noisy inputs (Yang et al., 2023; Bagla et al., 2023). Consequently, model-based verifiers risk propagating secondary classification errors. By contrast, EvidenT ’s lexical matching framework provides a completely domain-agnostic grounding signal that depends strictly on the re-trieved source text rather than the parametric knowl-edge of a secondary model. n t Retention Rate ( ↑) % Hallucination (Pre) % Hallucination (Post) ( ↓) Cov@10 ( ↑)

3 0.5 0.96 8.5 4.1 0.996 3 0.7 0.92 8.5 2.3 0.996 3 0.9 0.87 8.5 1.9 0.993 5 0.5 0.93 10.7 0.9 0.998 

5 0.7 0.91 10.7 0.6 0.999 

5 0.9 0.81 10.7 0.2 0.999 7 0.5 0.89 13.2 0.8 0.999 7 0.7 0.78 13.2 0.4 0.999 7 0.9 0.74 13.2 0.2 0.999 

Table 7: Ablation results over n-gram size ( n) and overlap threshold ( t) evaluated on model M2.