Title: Mapping the RAG Landscape: A Four Axis Taxonomy of Efficiency, Defense, Interactivity, and Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.01936v1

Published Time: Fri, 02 Oct 2026 02:13:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
1

# Mapping the RAG Landscape: A Four-Axis Taxonomy of Efficiency, Defense, Interactivity, and Reasoning 

## Meghana Sunil 1†, Shravya V 1†, Shravan Venkatraman 2, Joe Dhanith P R 1∗

Abstract —Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable fluency across many tasks but remain limited by their static, parameter-bound knowledge and their susceptibility to hallucinating information. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) addresses these issues by incorporating external retrieval into the generation process, grounding model outputs in verifiable and up-to-date sources. While prior surveys primarily focus on core RAG architectures and standard pipelines, recent research explores broader challenges and capabilities that extend beyond these foundational designs. This survey provides a consolidated and structured examination of contemporary RAG developments, organizing the field into a four-axis taxonomy: improving retrieval efficiency, strengthening robustness and security, supporting user-driven and interactive workflows, and enabling multi-step or complex reasoning. We formalize key components of the RAG framework and review methods spanning dense and sparse retrieval, fusion strategies, embedding optimizations, and reinforcement-learning–based retrieval policies, highlighting how these advances influence practical deployment and system design. We also synthesize evaluation practices, domain-specific applications, and architectural variants such as Naive, Advanced, and Modular RAG. Finally, we outline persistent challenges related to retrieval quality, reliability, domain adaptation, scalability, and explainability, and identify opportunities for building RAG systems that are more reliable, adaptable, and transparent. 

Index Terms —Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Large Language Models, Information Retrieval, Contextual Generation, Semantic Search 

## ✦

## 1 Introduction 

# Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have achieved remarkable progress in natural language generation, supporting applications ranging from conversa-tional systems to complex summarization and question an-swering [7, 8]. Despite this progress, a longstanding limitation of these models lies in their reliance on static, pre-trained parameters, which restricts their ability to incorporate new or domain-specific information. As a result, LLMs may produce inaccurate or hallucinated content, particularly in settings involving sparse inputs or attribute-heavy queries [9]. These issues pose significant challenges in knowledge-intensive tasks such as review generation [10, 11, 12, 13], dialogue systems [14, 15, 16, 17], and data-to-text (D2T) generation [18, 19, 20], where factual correctness and contextual relevance are essential [21]. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) addresses these challenges by coupling LLMs with external retrieval systems that provide access to relevant, verifiable information at inference time [22, 23, 24]. Instead of depend-ing solely on internal parametric knowledge, RAG models dynamically retrieve semantically relevant content from struc-tured or unstructured corpora such as relational databases, RDF graphs, or large-scale text collections [25, 26, 27]. This retrieval-grounded formulation enables more accurate gen-

• 1School of Computer Science and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai, India. 

• 2Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE. 

• ∗Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): joedhanith.pr@vit.ac.in 

• Contributing authors: meghana.sunil2023@vitstudent.ac.in; shravya.v2023@vitstudent.ac.in; shravan.venkatraman@mbzuai.ac.ae 

• †These authors contributed equally to this work. 

eration, supports rapid adaptation to new information, and improves model transparency. This retrieval-capable architecture also allows RAG sys-tems to support personalized or user-specific workflows [28, 29, 30], such as product reviews, recommendation systems, and user-facing assistants, as well as high-stakes domains such as medical diagnosis [31, 32, 33], education [34], and customer support where factual grounding is critical [35]. Reinforcement learning for LLMs [36, 37, 38] has further been used to optimize retrieval strategies dynamically, improving relevance and efficiency in real-world deployments [39]. We review the formal structure of RAG and its architectural variants-Naïve, Advanced, and Modular RAG-together with their evaluation practices in §3.1. Figure 1 summarizes the four core dimensions emphasized in recent RAG research-efficiency, security, interactivity, and complex reasoning-which reflect emerging priorities as RAG transitions from experimental prototypes to widely deployed systems and is increasingly integrated into training pipelines and domain-adapted workflows [40]. This survey organizes recent advancements along these four themes-compression and efficiency [41], defensive RAG [40, 39], interactive and user-centric RAG [27, 26], and complex reasoning [42, 21, 43]-each tied to a central research question (RQ1-RQ4 below) and characterized by representative contributions in retrieval scoring, context construction, safety-aware filtering, personal-ization, and multi-step reasoning. These axes were selected because they represent emerg-ing, orthogonal, and under-reviewed dimensions of the RAG ecosystem-dimensions that extend beyond traditional tax-onomies centered solely on retrieval or generation pipelines. Previous surveys have primarily focused on dense-versus-sparse retrieval comparisons, broad architectural overviews, arXiv:2610.01936v1 [cs.AI] 1 Oct 2026 2

Fig. 1: Overview of the four taxonomic dimensions of RAG systems explored in this survey: Compression and Efficiency ,

Defensive RAG , User-Centric Interaction , and Complex Rea-soning . These axes represent key directions in optimizing performance, improving security and fairness, aligning with user intent, and supporting structured reasoning. or generic RAG workflows, leaving deeper conceptual dis-tinctions underexplored. Our perspective differs by empha-sizing the theoretical motivations, algorithmic shifts, and design trade-offs that uniquely characterize each axis. Rather than treating RAG as a monolithic augmentation strategy, we highlight concerns such as retrieval–generation coupling, personalization constraints, safety-aware filtering, and multi-step reasoning pipelines-areas that have expanded rapidly yet remain dispersed across the literature. By consolidating these developments into four coherent axes, this survey of-fers a structured and forward-looking understanding of how retrieval-augmented systems are evolving and where they diverge from traditional LLM enhancement strategies. To provide a concrete and answerable structure, we orga-nize this review around four research questions that reflect central, unresolved tensions in the RAG literature: 

RQ1 (Efficiency): How can RAG systems maintain high factual accuracy while operating under the inference-time constraints imposed by large-scale and heterogeneous corpora-and which retrieval and compression strategies most effectively navigate the accuracy–cost trade-off? 

RQ2 (Defense): What principal vulnerabilities does exter-nal retrieval introduce into LLM pipelines-including cor-pus poisoning, demographic bias amplification, and pri-vacy leakage-and how effectively do current defensive architectures mitigate them? 

RQ3 (Interactivity): To what extent can RAG systems adapt to evolving user intent, interaction history, and preference signals-and what mechanisms best balance personalization with factual precision? 

RQ4 (Reasoning): How does integrating retrieval into iter-ative, step-conditioned reasoning pipelines improve per-formance on multi-hop and knowledge-intensive tasks compared to single-pass retrieval-and what architectural properties prevent error accumulation across reasoning steps? These questions are neither fully solved nor fully open: §3 surveys what the literature has achieved on each, §5 maps where each question remains unresolved, and §6 identifies the research directions most likely to produce progress. Together, they provide a lens for evaluating whether a given system advances the field along a specific, meaningful dimension rather than treating RAG as an undifferentiated body of work. 

## 2 Survey Methodology 

To ensure methodological transparency and reproducibility, we adopt a structured literature review protocol inspired by Snyder’s framework for systematic and semi-systematic reviews [44] and aligned with the PRISMA 2020 principles. 1

Our goal was to capture developments in RAG across the rapid expansion period from January 2020 to January 2025. We queried three major scholarly repositories-Google Scholar, Semantic Scholar, and arXiv-using both broad and domain-targeted keywords such as “retrieval-augmented genera-tion”, “RAG LLM”, “RAG pipeline”, “RAG benchmark”, “RAG evaluation”, “RAG defense”, “RAG fairness”, “multi-hop retrieval LLM”, “RAG hallucination”, and “knowledge-grounded generation”. These searches yielded approximately 780 records across peer-reviewed venues, preprints, and work-shop papers, forming the identification stage of our PRISMA-inspired workflow. Screening proceeded under explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria designed to ensure consistency across the surveyed literature. We included works that (i) integrate retrieval and generation within a unified pipeline, (ii) introduce method-ological, architectural, or empirical innovations relevant to RAG, (iii) propose RAG-specific benchmarks or evaluation frameworks, or (iv) investigate security, robustness, fairness, or safety aspects of retrieval-augmented LLMs. We excluded works that (i) lack a retrieval component, (ii) describe stan-dalone retrievers or standalone LLMs without integration, or (iii) offer no technical or empirical contribution. The resulting corpus forms the evidence base synthesized throughout this survey and directly supports the four-axis taxonomy intro-duced in later sections. This ensures that the review reflects both breadth and depth, provides balanced coverage across research directions, and maintains alignment with established systematic review standards. To further control for completeness, we supplemented the keyword-based search with a targeted citation-snowballing pass. Starting from one representative paper per taxonomy axis plus the foundational RAG paper (Lewis et al., 2020 [45], for the field as a whole; RAPTOR [46] for compression and efficiency; SELF-RAG [47] for defensive RAG; Chat-REC [48] for interactive, user-centric RAG; and GenGround [49] for complex multi-step reasoning), we traced citations in both directions, examining each seed paper’s own references (back-ward) and the works that cite it (forward). This pass was scoped as a targeted completeness check on the four axes rather than a re-execution of the full identification stage, 

> 1. https://www.prisma-statement.org/ 3

and it surfaced several additional candidate papers directly relevant to the corresponding axis, including HippoRAG [50] (compression and efficiency), RuleRAG [51] (defensive RAG), MemoCRS [52] (interactive, user-centric RAG), and recent iterative multi-hop reasoning work extending GenGround [53] (complex reasoning). 

## 3 Taxonomy of RAG-LLM Architectures 

3.1 Conceptual Overview 

RAG is a hybrid framework that enhances the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) by integrating real-time information retrieval into the text generation process. Unlike conventional LLMs that rely entirely on static, paramet-ric knowledge learned during pre-training, RAG introduces an external retrieval step that surfaces relevant, up-to-date information from knowledge bases, databases, or document repositories. This augmentation allows the model to pro-duce more reliable and contextually grounded outputs while mitigating hallucinations that arise when the model lacks sufficient internal knowledge. The dynamic nature of retrieval enables RAG systems to remain responsive in domains where information evolves rapidly, making them especially effective in knowledge-intensive or time-sensitive applications. The RAG framework operates in two principal stages. During the retrieval stage, the system identifies documents or passages that are relevant to an input query using methods such as Dense Passage Retrieval (DPR), which leverages neu-ral embeddings for semantic matching, or sparse techniques like BM25, which use term-frequency and inverse-document-frequency scoring. Following retrieval, the generation stage conditions a pre-trained language model, such as GPT or T5, on the combined query and retrieved content to synthesize a coherent and factually grounded response. This fusion step ensures that generated text reflects both the model’s paramet-ric knowledge and the contextual evidence provided through retrieval. A key advantage of RAG lies in its adaptability. Tra-ditional LLMs require costly retraining to incorporate new information, whereas RAG systems can integrate updates at inference time simply by retrieving from refreshed or domain-specific corpora, improving factual accuracy in domains with frequent updates (e.g., medicine, finance, law). This design also improves interpretability, as users can trace generated statements back to supporting evidence rather than an opaque parametric prior, creating a more transparent generation process well suited to knowledge-intensive, time-sensitive, and high-stakes applications. 

3.2 Theoretical Background 

By separating knowledge retrieval from parametric genera-tion, RAG systems overcome constraints imposed by static training pipelines, remaining responsive in fields such as healthcare, legal reasoning, and technical support where ac-curacy and specificity are critical. This conceptual shift lays the groundwork for hybrid systems that match the fluency of LLMs with the factual grounding of information retrieval, formalized below. The retrieval component in RAG plays a central role in enabling this hybrid functionality. Rather than generating 

Fig. 2: Overview of the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline. The workflow is divided into two phases: (1) offline indexing, where source documents are chunked, en-coded into dense embeddings, and stored in a vector database; and (2) online retrieval and generation, where the user query is embedded and used to retrieve the top-k semantically relevant document chunks via vector similarity search. The retrieved context is combined with the original query and supplied to the large language model (LLM), enabling grounded and context-aware response generation. responses solely from internal representations, RAG systems actively search for relevant documents from large-scale knowl-edge bases, web corpora, or structured datasets. Retrieval methods [54] typically fall into two categories. Sparse re-trieval techniques such as BM25 rely on term-frequency and inverse-document-frequency scoring, making them effective for keyword-driven matching. Dense retrieval techniques such as Dense Passage Retrieval (DPR) use neural embeddings to capture semantic similarity between queries and documents, enabling retrieval even when wording differs. The retrieved context is subsequently fused with the user query during generation, allowing the model to produce responses that are both grounded and explainable. This integration ensures that retrieved knowledge directly influences the generative process rather than serving as an auxiliary signal. This hybridization of parametric and non-parametric knowledge addresses key shortcomings of standard LLMs, particularly their inability to access or incorporate new in-formation after pre-training. While parametric models like GPT provide fluent, general-purpose generation, they are inherently static and cannot adapt without retraining. RAG systems overcome this rigidity by retrieving new informa-tion on demand, reducing the need for continual model up-dates and improving factual consistency. Emerging hybrid approaches further refine this balance by combining the gener-alization capabilities of parametric models with the precision and relevance offered by retrieval-based augmentation. These methods create a more flexible and adaptive architecture that supports dynamic reasoning, domain-aware responses, and improved robustness across diverse tasks. Figure 2 illustrates the overall structure of a standard RAG pipeline, highlight-ing how retrieval and generation interact to form grounded responses. 4

In traditional parametric models, a language model Pθ (y |

x) is learned purely from training data, where: 

Pθ (y | x) = Decoder( x; θ) (1) Here, x is the input, y is the output, and θ represents the fixed parameters learned during training. This formulation captures the standard setting where all knowledge required for generation is internal to the model. In Retrieval-Augmented Generation, this paradigm is extended by incorporating an external retrieval mecha-nism. Given a query x, a set of relevant documents D =

{d1, d 2, . . . , d k} is retrieved from an external corpus C using a retriever function R:

D = R(x, C) (2) This retrieved context augments the generative process by providing non-parametric evidence that supports or refines the model’s output. The generation probability is then reformulated as: 

P (y | x) = ∑

> d∈D

P (y | x, d ) · P (d | x) (3) where:  

> •

P (d | x) is the probability of retrieving document d given query x. 

> •

P (y | x, d ) is the generation probability conditioned on both the query and the retrieved document. This decomposition explicitly models how retrieval influences generation and provides an interpretable formulation for grounding outputs in external knowledge. 

Retrieval Models. Sparse and dense retrieval are two pri-mary families of methods used to identify relevant documents. Sparse retrieval techniques such as BM25 employ TF-IDF-based scoring and match queries to documents based on exact or near-exact keyword overlap. The BM25 scoring function is defined as: Score BM25 (x, d ) = ∑

> t∈x∩d

IDF( t) f (t, d ) ( k + 1) 

f (t, d ) + k

(

1 − b + b |d|

> avgdl

)

(4) where f (t, d ) is the frequency of term t in document d, and k,

b are hyperparameters controlling term frequency scaling and document length normalization. Dense retrieval techniques such as DPR compute similar-ity in a learned embedding space: Score DPR (x, d ) = ϕq (x)⊤ϕd(d) (5) where ϕq and ϕd are neural encoders for queries and docu-ments, respectively, enabling semantic matching even in the absence of exact term overlap. The retrieval distribution is typically normalized using a softmax: 

P (d | x) = exp(Score( x, d )) 

∑ 

> d′∈D

exp(Score( x, d ′)) (6) This converts raw similarity scores into a proper probability distribution over the retrieved set. As introduced in the orig-inal RAG framework [45], this probabilistic treatment allows the generator to marginalize over all retrieved documents-weighting each document’s contribution by its retrieval score-rather than conditioning generation on a single top-ranked 

Algorithm 1 RAG Pipeline 

Require: Input query x, corpus C, embedding model ϕ,retriever R, generator G, top-k parameter k

Ensure: Generated response ˆ y 

> 1:

// Offline: Index Construction  

> 2:

for all di ∈ C do  

> 3:

vi ← ϕd(di) ▷ Encode documents  

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

Store {vi} in vector index I 

> 6:

// Online: Inference Pipeline  

> 7:

q ← ϕq (x) ▷ Encode query  

> 8:

D ← R(q, I) ▷ Retrieve top-k docs  

> 9:

C ← concat( x, D ) ▷ Combine query and retrieved context  

> 10:

ˆy ← G (C) ▷ Generate grounded output  

> 11:

return ˆy

passage. The resulting distribution directly feeds into Equa-tion (3), where P (d | x) governs how each retrieved docu-ment’s generated probability is combined into the final output distribution. This softmax-marginalization treatment is a specific mod-eling choice, not a universal requirement of RAG systems, and it is worth being explicit about what it assumes and what it costs. First, the normalization in Eq. (6) is computed only over the top-k retrieved set D, not the full corpus C: P (d | x)is a distribution over the k documents the retriever has already selected, not a calibrated estimate of relevance over all possible evidence, so the formulation inherits whatever recall errors occurred upstream in R(x, C). Second, this is the RAG-Sequence/RAG-Token marginalization originally proposed by Lewis et al. [45], which treats each retrieved document as conditionally independent given the query-an assumption that simplifies inference but does not allow the model to reason jointly across documents the way a single concatenated con-text would. Not all systems in this survey adopt it: several ar-chitectures discussed in §3 instead condition deterministically on a fixed top-k concatenation (treating P (d | x) as implicitly uniform or thresholded rather than softmax-weighted), or replace the marginal in Eq. (6) entirely with learned re-ranking or critique scores (e.g., Algorithm 3’s ˜Rel( q, d )). We retain the softmax formulation here because it is the most common closed-form baseline against which compression-, defense-, interaction-, and reasoning-aware variants in later sections can be compared, not because it is the only valid choice. The full retrieval-augmented inference process is summarized in Algorithm 1, which outlines both offline index construction and online document selection during generation. This retrieval-augmented framework enables the system to dynamically incorporate new information without retrain-ing, improving factual grounding, explainability, and domain adaptability. By separating retrieval from generation while coupling them at inference time, RAG provides a flexible architecture capable of supporting evolving domains and high-stakes applications. This theoretical grounding forms the basis for the taxonomic analysis presented in subsequent sections. 5

TABLE 1: Comparison of prior RAG surveys and the contributions of this work.                                                       

> Survey Year Focus Area What They Cover What They Don’t Cover What This Survey Adds
> Brehme et al. [55] 2025 RAG evaluation LLM judges, dataset scoring Indexing and component-wise evaluation Four-axis taxonomy (ef-ficiency, defense, interac-tivity, reasoning) beyond evaluation methodology alone Hindi et al. [56] 2025 Legal-domain RAG Interpretability, legal datasets Generalizable evaluation methods Domain-independent four-axis taxonomy, not limited to asingle domain Ni et al. [57] 2025 Trustworthy RAG Safety, robustness, fair-ness Dataset/index/generation evaluation Extends safety/robust-ness focus with three fur-ther axes: efficiency, in-teractivity, and reason-ing Zheng et al. [58] 2025 Vision-based RAG Multimodal retrieval and generation Text-only methodological evaluation Four-axis taxonomy for text-based RAG, com-plementing multimodal-focused coverage Oche et al. [59] 2025 Systematic RAG review Year-wise progress, in-dustry trends Limited methodological depth Formalizes each axis via objective, algorithm, and literature synthesis, beyond trend-level review Singh et al. [26] 2025 Agentic RAG Planning, tool-use, au-tonomous agents Evaluation of core RAG components Clarifies boundary be-tween agentic RAG and this survey’s four-axis architectural taxonomy

3.3 Historical Development 

Early retrieval systems such as TF-IDF and BM25 enabled large-scale lexical document search but were limited by surface-level term matching, which hindered semantic flex-ibility. This motivated the development of neural retrieval methods-and eventually the tight coupling of retrieval with generative language models-that provide deeper semantic alignment and more flexible knowledge integration. The introduction of neural retrieval models in the late 2010s marked a transformative shift toward more expressive retrieval mechanisms. Dense retrieval systems such as DPR employed deep neural networks to map queries and documents into a shared embedding space, enabling semantic similarity computation via vector distance rather than relying solely on lexical overlap. This innovation significantly improved retrieval quality and made it possible to integrate external evidence more effectively into downstream language genera-tion tasks. The formalization of the RAG framework in 2020 by researchers at Facebook AI and OpenAI further advanced this trajectory by unifying dense retrieval with generative LLMs into a tightly coupled inference workflow. Unlike earlier pipeline-style approaches, this unified architecture allowed models to generate responses that were contextually coher-ent and grounded in verifiable external knowledge, resulting in substantial improvements on knowledge-intensive bench-marks. More recently, long-context retrieval systems have ex-tended this trajectory to entire documents and heterogeneous knowledge sources, supporting multi-hop inference, dynamic knowledge adaptation, and domain-specific reasoning. 

3.4 Positioning Relative to Prior RAG Surveys 

Recent surveys have examined RAG systems from a variety of perspectives, yet each tends to focus on a specific subset of challenges rather than providing a unified methodological analysis. Brehme et al. [55] focus on evaluation methodolo-gies, particularly the reliability of LLM-based judges and the challenges associated with automated assessment of gener-ated content. Hindi et al. [56] emphasize precision and in-terpretability within legal-domain RAG, offering application-specific insights but lacking generalizable evaluation frame-works that extend beyond legal settings. Ni et al. [57] ap-proach RAG from the standpoint of trustworthiness, dis-cussing robustness, safety, and fairness but not addressing dataset construction, indexing behavior, or generator-side evaluation. Zheng et al. [58] extend RAG analysis into the multimodal space by examining retrieval-augmented vision-language systems, while Oche et al. [59] provide a broad sys-tematic review that highlights year-wise progress and indus-trial adoption trends. Finally, Singh et al. [26] survey agentic RAG, emphasizing planning, tool use, and autonomous work-flows in retrieval-augmented agents. However, none of these surveys synthesize a unified evaluation perspective that spans the core components of RAG pipelines, including datasets, retrievers, indexing strategies, and generation modules. Table 1 summarizes the distinctions between these prior works and the focus of this survey. Existing literature pri-marily centers on trust, domain specificity, multimodal rea-soning, or agentic behavior, each typically treated as an isolated concern rather than part of a broader organizing structure. By contrast, this survey organizes RAG research along four orthogonal axes-compression and efficiency, de-fensive and safety-aware design, interactive and user-centric personalization, and complex multi-step reasoning-each for-malized through a dedicated objective, reference algorithm, and synthesis of representative contributions. This structure addresses practical needs for system builders who must jointly reason about retrieval cost, safety, personalization, and rea-soning depth rather than treating these as disconnected de-sign choices. Although agentic RAG represents an important 6

emerging direction [26], it is aligned with different goals-autonomous planning and tool use-and remains orthogonal to the architectural and methodological taxonomy developed in this work. Instead, we concentrate on the foundational mecha-nisms that govern RAG behavior and shape the effectiveness, safety, personalization, and reasoning capacity of deployed retrieval-augmented systems. Concretely, the distinctive con-tribution of this survey is not its choice of topics but its organizing principle. Where prior surveys partition the field either by a single concern (trust, domain, modality, or agentic behavior) or by pipeline stage (retrieval versus generation), we organize it by the design tension a system is built to optimize :accuracy under cost (RQ1), robustness under adversarial or biased evidence (RQ2), alignment with evolving user state (RQ3), and fidelity across multi-step reasoning (RQ4). This is the dimension along which a practitioner actually chooses, and we make it comparable by pairing each axis with a formal objective (Eq. (7)-(10)), a reference algorithm (Algorithms 2-5), and the cross-axis method comparison in Table 2-a level of structured, side-by-side analysis that the prose-driven organi-zation of prior surveys does not provide. 

3.5 Taxonomy Structure and Cross-Axis Comparison 

This taxonomy is organized along two levels with explicit branching criteria. At the first level , we partition the field into four problem domains-compression and efficiency, defen-sive RAG, interactive and user-centric RAG, and complex reasoning-each corresponding to one of the research questions RQ1-RQ4 introduced in §1. At the second level , we deliber-ately do not branch by chronology; instead, within each axis we group contributions into families of solutions defined by the sub-problem they solve (for efficiency, e.g., utility-cost opti-mization, structural compression, domain-adaptive retrieval, and evaluation tooling). The branching criterion at this level is therefore the mechanism a method uses to address its axis’s central tension, not its date of publication. This produces subsubsections that are comparable across axes and that map onto the shared design features summarized in Table 2. Although all four axes share the retrieve-then-generate backbone of Algorithm 1, their objectives differ in what they optimize and which control variable they expose . The efficiency objective (Eq. (7)) maximizes a utility-to-cost ratio , exposing the compression cost Cϕ(di) as its lever; the defensive objec-tive (Eq. (8)) replaces that ratio with an additive risk penalty 

(1 − T (d)) + P(d) + B(d) weighted by relevance, exposing per-document toxicity, privacy, and bias scores; the interactive objective (Eq. (9)) introduces user-conditioned terms H(u, d )and F (d, u ) under a personalized policy πu(d | q), exposing interaction history and feedback; and the reasoning objective (Eq. (10)) is the only multi-step formulation, summing a per-step retrieval-grounded term with coherence and consis-tency regularizers across T reasoning steps. The reference algorithms differ correspondingly: the efficiency and defensive pipelines (Algorithms 2 and 3) re-score a single retrieved set-by cost and by risk, respectively-whereas the interactive pipeline (Algorithm 4) samples from a user-conditioned distri-bution and the reasoning pipeline (Algorithm 5) re-enters re-trieval at every step. Read together, each formulation relaxes a different limitation of the plain RAG objective (Eq. (3)): efficiency adds cost-awareness, defense adds risk-awareness, interactivity adds user state, and reasoning adds multi-hop temporal structure. Table 2 operationalizes this comparison at the method level: it characterizes representative systems from each axis by the cross-cutting design features they exhibit and the research question(s) they primarily address, making explicit how a given subset of features maps to progress on a specific RQ. 

3.6 Compression and Efficiency-Driven RAG 

The compression and efficiency axis is included in the taxon-omy because a large portion of recent RAG research explicitly examines the computational bottlenecks introduced by re-trieval at scale [46, 60, 61, 62]. As external corpora continue to grow and RAG systems increasingly integrate heterogeneous sources, a consistent theme across the literature is the need to reduce retrieval latency, limit token overhead, and improve the relevance–cost trade-off when selecting context. These concerns are especially salient in production systems, where inference cost and throughput place tight constraints on how much context can be retrieved and processed. Many works therefore treat retrieval as an optimization problem that balances the benefits of additional evidence against the cost of longer input sequences and slower decoding. This pattern recurs across studies published from 2020-2025 and motivates treating compression- and efficiency-oriented approaches as a distinct dimension within the broader RAG landscape. In practice, this axis captures methods that rethink how much to retrieve, how to compress it, and how to allocate scarce context budget without sacrificing model performance. We define a retrieval- and compression-aware objective for compression- and efficiency-driven RAG systems as follows: min  

> θ,ϕ

Eq∼Q 

[ k∑

> i=1

U(q, d i) · log 

( pθ (di | q)

Cϕ(di)

)]

. (7) where:  

> •

q ∈ Q : input query drawn from the query distribution.  

> •

di: the i-th retrieved document for query q. 

> •

pθ (di | q): retrieval probability of document di given query q, parameterized by retriever parameters θ. 

> •

U(q, d i) ∈ [0 , 1]: utility function measuring the relevance or helpfulness of di for query q. 

> •

Cϕ(di) > 0: compression cost or token-level cost of including document di, parameterized by compression module ϕ. 

> •

log 

( pθ (di |q)  

> Cϕ(di)

)

: log-efficiency score balancing relevance and cost. This objective prioritizes high-utility, low-cost documents for inclusion in the context window, reflecting the core trade-offs in compression- and efficiency-driven RAG. The retriever aims to surface documents that are semantically aligned with the query, while the compression model estimates the expected cost of including each document in the LLM’s input con-text (e.g., token length, redundancy, or entropy). The log-ratio quantifies how much useful information each document provides relative to its cost, thereby guiding the selection of documents that maximize informativeness per token under constrained budgets. In other words, the retrieval model at-tempts to approximate the ideal allocation of context, where each additional token contributes meaningful evidence rather 7

TABLE 2: Cross-axis comparison of representative RAG methods. Each method is marked ( ✓) with the cross-cutting design features it exhibits and the research question(s) it primarily addresses. Feature columns: Comp./cost -compression- or cost-aware context selection; Multi-step -retrieval interleaved across reasoning or refinement steps; Safety -toxicity, bias, or privacy filtering; Personal. -user/history-conditioned retrieval; Structured -retrieval over graphs, tables, or other structure; Verify -critique or verification of retrieved evidence.                                                                                                                                         

> Method Retrieval Comp./cost Multi-step Safety Personal. Structured Verify Primary RQ
> Compression & Efficiency (RQ1)
> RAPTOR [46] Dense ✓−−−✓−RQ1 xRAG [60] Dense ✓−−−−−RQ1 RQ-RAG [61] Dense ✓✓−−−−RQ1 Stochastic RAG [62] Dense ✓−−−−−RQ1
> Defensive RAG (RQ2)
> FILCO [63] Dense −−✓−−✓RQ2 SELF-RAG [47] Dense −✓✓−−✓RQ2, RQ4 PoisonedRAG [64] Dense −−✓−−−RQ2 FairRAG [65] Dense −−✓−−−RQ2
> Interactive, User-Centric (RQ3)
> Chat-REC [48] Dense −−−✓−−RQ3 PersonaRAG [66] Dense −−−✓−−RQ3 ERAGent [67] Dense ✓✓−✓−✓RQ3 ISEEQ [68] Hybrid −✓−−✓−RQ3
> Complex Reasoning (RQ4)
> IRCoT [69] Dense −✓−−−−RQ4 GenGround [49] Dense −✓−−−✓RQ4 PlanRAG [70] Dense −✓−−✓−RQ4 G-Retriever [71] Graph −−−−✓−RQ4

than redundant or distracting information. This formulation captures a principle that appears implicitly across many sys-tems, even when it is not written explicitly as an optimization objective. The expression also highlights the central relevance–cost trade-off that defines this axis. The term pθ (di | q) repre-sents the retrieval probability of a document being useful for answering the query, while Cϕ(di) captures token-level compression cost, redundancy, entropy, or other length-based constraints. The log-ratio thus prioritizes documents that provide high expected utility while incurring minimal context overhead, a principle underlying many efficiency-focused RAG systems. Algorithm 2 sketches a generic compression-aware pipeline that reflects common design choices: scoring docu-ments by utility and cost, filtering noisy or low-yield evidence, and constructing a compact context set for downstream gen-eration. Variants of this pipeline appear in systems that use hierarchical retrieval [46], minimal-context prompting [60], reranking [72], and other strategies [73] aimed at controlling inference-time cost while preserving answer quality. This pipeline reflects operations found across the liter-ature: utility estimation, compression-aware scoring, noise filtering, and selection of high-efficiency documents. Variants of these steps appear in works on few-shot retrieval, hierarchi-cal access, query reformulation, and token-minimal context construction, often combined with model-side optimizations such as pruning or distillation. Together, they illustrate how efficiency considerations increasingly shape the design of mod-ern RAG systems and motivate this axis of the taxonomy. Figure 3 contrasts this compression-aware pipeline with a normal RAG pipeline, showing how compressed-index lookup and contextual compression narrow a full candidate chunk set down to the minimal evidence passed to the generator. 

Algorithm 2 Compression-Aware Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

Require: Query q, corpus C, retriever parameters θ, com-pressor parameters ϕ, top-k retrieval size 

Ensure: Compressed document context Dcomp for genera-tion  

> 1:

qvec ← ϕq (q) ▷ Encode query  

> 2:

D ← RetrieveTopK( qvec , C, θ ) 

> 3:

for all di ∈ D do  

> 4:

Compute U(q, d i) ▷ Utility or relevance score  

> 5:

Compute Cϕ(di) ▷ Compression or cost estimate  

> 6:

Compute efficiency score Ei ← log 

( pθ (di |q)  

> Cϕ(di)

) 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Dcomp ← SelectTopDocuments( D, based on Ei) 

> 9:

return Dcomp 

3.1.1 Utility-Cost Optimization and Query Refinement 

The most direct expression of this axis is the effort to maxi-mize the usefulness of retrieved evidence relative to its cost, mirroring the utility term U(q, d i) and the log-efficiency score at the heart of the objective defined for this axis. Several meth-ods establish the building blocks of utility- and cost-aware re-trieval. REINA (Retrieving from the traINing datA) proposed enhancing NLP task performance by retrieving semantically similar labeled examples from the training set [74]. Although REINA did not involve external retrieval, it highlighted the potential of instance-level context reuse and drew attention to the computational bottlenecks involved in large-scale index traversal-an issue central to efficient RAG. In a similar spirit, 

Improving Language Models by Retrieving from Trillions of Tokens [75] demonstrated that integrating retrieval over vast external corpora could substantially improve language mod-8USER QUERY   

> How many vacation days do employees
> get per year?
> EMBED THE QUERY
> COMPRESSED INDEX
> LOOKUP
> Chunk A: “Full-time employees accrue 1.5 days per
> month…”
> Chunk B: “Vacation cannot exceed 18 days annually
> unless approved…”
> Chunk C: “Leave balance resets at year-end…"
> Chunk D: “Part-time employees accrue leave
> proportionally…”
> Chunk E: “Unused vacation expires after 12
> months…”
> PASS TO LLM
> LLM GENERATES FINAL
> ANSWER
> RETRIEVE TOP K
> CHUNKS FROM VECTOR
> DB
> “Full-time employees get 18 vacation days per
> year. Unused days expire after 12 months.
> Part-time employees may get less depending on
> hours worked.”
> CONTEXTUAL COMPRESSION
> “Employees accrue 1.5 vacation
> days/month.”
> “Annual vacation cap: 18 days.”
> LLM GENERATES FINAL
> ANSWER
> “Employees earn 1.5 vacation days each month,
> totaling 18 days per year.”
> PASS TO LLM
> NORMAL RAG COMPRESSION AND
> EFFICIENCY DRIVEN RAG
> COSINE SIMILARITY ANN SEARCH
> “Employees accrue 1.5 vacation days per month.”
> “Annual vacation cap: 18 days.”
> “Unused days may carry over if approved.”
> “Part-time leave is prorated.”

Fig. 3: Schematic of Compression and Efficiency-Driven RAG systems. eling, especially in low-resource or domain-specific settings. By retrieving over vast external corpora, it makes the cost of indiscriminate retrieval a first-order concern-precisely the cost that the utility-cost objective is designed to manage. A complementary line of work made clear why cost-aware selection matters. LLMs Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrel-evant Context [76] showed that even high-performing LLMs could suffer substantial performance drops when presented with extraneous or misleading context. These findings un-derscore the need for careful filtering and query refinement so that compression and pruning do not discard useful ev-idence, a principle that methods operationalize in several ways. Augmentation-aware retrievers explicitly model the interaction between retrieved context and generative objec-tives, encouraging retrieval policies that better align with the downstream use of evidence and treating the retriever and generator as co-adaptive modules rather than disjoint com-ponents [77]. Prompt-guided retrieval strategies extended this idea to non-knowledge-intensive tasks such as classification and text generation, using prompt reranking to better align retrieved context with task-specific requirements [78]. Query-side refinement is more targeted still: RQ-RAG provides modules that dynamically rewrite retrieval queries to improve document relevance and address the brittleness of static query formulations [61], while broader studies of context-selection strategies across multiple domains argued that one-size-fits-all retrieval policies fail to generalize and advocated adaptive mechanisms informed by dataset characteristics and task ob-jectives [42]. Stochastic RAG made the cost-utility trade-off explicit by adopting utility-maximization formulations that guide retrieval based on expected generation quality, directly instantiating the utility term U(q, d i) that the efficiency ob-jective seeks to maximize per unit of context cost [62]. 

3.1.2 Structural Compression and Hierarchical Retrieval 

A second family of methods targets the compression cost 

Cϕ(di) directly, reducing the token and computational foot-print of retrieved evidence through structural means. On the model side, structured pruning methods compress generative backbones without significant loss in performance, offering a lightweight alternative for latency-sensitive applications [79]. On the representation side, SANTA pretrains language mod-els with an inductive bias toward structured data formats, improving dense retrieval from semi-structured corpora such as tables or knowledge graphs [80]. Rather than retrieving flat sets of passages, RAPTOR organizes information into recursive tree-based abstractions that can be traversed or summarized, enabling more efficient reasoning over multi-level content; in effect, it implements the SelectTopDocuments step of Algorithm 2 over a hierarchy of higher-level units rather than a flat candidate set [46]. Compression itself was pushed to an extreme by xRAG, which distills relevant information into minimal tokens without compromising response quality-an approach that directly minimizes the compression-cost term Cϕ(di) in the efficiency objective [60]. Superposition prompting complements these methods by exploring parallel retrieval streams that reduce inference latency and filter noisy documents [73]. 9

3.1.3 Domain-Adaptive and Low-Supervision Retrieval 

A third theme concerns adapting retrieval to new domains and operating under limited supervision, where the cost being op-timized is the cost of labeled data and domain transfer rather than tokens alone. The challenge of handling diverse retrieval sources was tackled in RAG across Heterogeneous Knowl-edge [81], which addressed integrating information across corpora with varying formats, quality, and domain alignment through multi-source retrieval and fusion. To reduce the cost of labeled supervision, PROMPTAGATOR proposed a few-shot dense retrieval pipeline that required as few as eight examples, using LLMs to synthesize training queries in data-scarce settings and lowering the entry barrier for new retrieval systems [82]. Retrieval was also used as a form of implicit supervision in model synthesis for domain-specific languages (DSLs), where in-domain exemplars guide generation and help systems cope with out-of-distribution generalization [83]. Generalization to unseen tasks was advanced by UPRISE, a universal prompt retrieval system for zero-shot evaluation that leverages retrieval to design effective prompts without task-specific tuning [84], while in the recommendation domain RAG techniques were adapted for open-world personalization by incorporating retrieval-augmented knowledge into recom-mender pipelines [85]. As RAG expanded into specialized domains, structure-and language-aware retrieval became central. Chunking strategies tailored to financial documents were proposed to improve retrieval granularity in dense, highly technical cor-pora [86], and benchmarks such as LegalBench-RAG [87] together with Arabic-specific evaluations highlighted the chal-lenges of non-English, morphologically rich, and highly struc-tured legal data retrieval [88, 89]. The same low-supervision, domain-adaptive philosophy carried RAG into new applica-tion areas: retrieval-augmented test generation surfaced rel-evant code or documentation during test synthesis to sup-port software engineering workflows [90], generative retrieval methods incorporated richer item and user context into rec-ommender systems [91], and retrieval-guided generation was used for synthetic dataset creation to improve diversity and realism [92]. Collectively, these methods show how retrieval can act as both a knowledge source and a control signal that supports domain adaptation and personalization under constrained supervision. 

3.1.4 Evaluation and Toolkits 

Progress on efficiency-driven RAG has been accompanied by infrastructure for measuring and reproducing it. Modular toolkits such as FlashRAG, RAG Foundry, and RAGLAB emerged as open-source platforms that support configurable, reproducible experimentation across datasets and architec-tures, providing standardized interfaces for retrievers, genera-tors, and evaluators that lower the barrier to entry and enable more systematic comparisons [93, 94, 95]. On the evaluation side, RAGAS introduced automated, reference-free metrics that assess both retrieval quality and generation fidelity [96], while RAGBench provided a multi-domain benchmark for ex-plainable RAG evaluation across tasks and retrieval configura-tions [97]. Other studies focused on the impact of embedding models on retrieval relevance, underscoring that embedding choice remains a critical but often underappreciated factor in RAG performance [98]. Together, these efforts make clear that evaluating efficiency involves not only latency and context length but also how compression and retrieval decisions affect downstream quality. Taken as a whole, compression- and efficiency-driven RAG spans four complementary families: utility-aware query re-finement, structural and hierarchical compression, domain-adaptive retrieval under limited supervision, and compre-hensive evaluation ecosystems. This collective shift has en-abled RAG to scale across domains, adapt to new modal-ities, and maintain high utility even under compute and data constraints, making efficiency a cornerstone of modern knowledge-augmented generation that connects retrieval me-chanics, model architecture, and evaluation under a common cost-aware perspective. 

Key Takeaways & Insights 

Compression- and efficiency-driven RAG research reveals sev-eral consistent themes across the literature. A central insight is the importance of optimizing the trade-off between docu-ment utility and context cost, as formalized in Eq. (7) and operationalized by Algorithm 2. Across heterogeneous modal-ities, languages, and structured corpora, the recurring need is for adaptive methods that manage distractors and balance relevance against computational overhead. Recent advances in compression such as pruning, distillation, and augmentation-aware retrieval show a shift toward systems capable of op-erating efficiently under tight latency or memory constraints while maintaining generation quality. Despite this progress, current approaches face limitations including brittle retrieval scoring, loss of semantic fidelity under aggressive compression, sensitivity to ambiguous queries, insufficient robustness to domain shift, and a lack of unified evaluation standards for cost-aware retrieval performance. Common failure modes mirror these limitations: models often over-retrieve redundant or irrelevant evidence, under-retrieve essential information when compression is overly aggressive, or become susceptible to distractors that mislead generation. Existing systems also struggle with static query formulations and inconsistent handling of structured or mul-tilingual sources. Several gaps remain open, including the absence of a general framework for jointly optimizing retrieval and compression, limited understanding of how compres-sion affects multi-step reasoning, and the need for adaptive, intent-aware retrieval strategies. For practitioners, effective deployment requires balancing retrieval depth with context budget, incorporating reranking or utility scoring to filter noise, tuning compression to the specific task, and adopt-ing structure-aware retrieval when working with specialized corpora. Monitoring common failure modes and leveraging query-refinement mechanisms can further improve robustness in real-world, latency-sensitive RAG applications. 

3.7 Defensive RAG 

Figure 4 contrasts a normal RAG pipeline with a defensive RAG pipeline, in which an explicit harmful-content/bias de-tection stage either reframes the prompt or routes retrieval through a bias-aware, safe-document branch before gener-ation. Defensive RAG is included as a core axis of this taxonomy because a significant portion of recent work (2022-2024) explicitly focuses on mitigating hallucinations, reducing 10 Normal RAG Pipeline  Defensive RAG Pipeline  

> User Prompt
> Embed the prompt
> Retrieve top
> documents
> Pass retrieved
> documents
> LLM
> generates
> final
> response
> Harmful content /
> Bias detection
> Bias aware/
> Safe document
> retrieval
> LLM
> generates
> neutral
> response
> User Prompt
> If detected
> (Modify/ Block/
> Reframe
> prompt)
> Embed clean
> prompt

Fig. 4: Comparison between standard and defensive RAG pipelines, illustrating safeguards for harmful content detection, prompt sanitization, and bias-aware document retrieval. bias, improving adversarial robustness, and preventing pri-vacy leakage in retrieval-augmented systems [63, 47, 64, 65]. As RAG enters high-risk domains such as healthcare, finance, law, and public policy, safety and trustworthiness have be-come fundamental design criteria rather than optional add-ons. Standard RAG pipelines that simply retrieve and condi-tion on documents may inadvertently propagate misinforma-tion, expose sensitive information, or amplify harmful biases embedded in external corpora. These risks motivate special-ized architectures and objectives that treat safety, fairness, and privacy as first-class optimization goals. Defensive RAG systems therefore modify both retrieval and generation to respect risk-aware constraints, filter or downweight harmful evidence, and introduce verification or critique stages before producing final outputs. Within this taxonomy, these efforts are grouped under a single axis to highlight shared techniques and challenges in building robust, trustworthy RAG systems. We define a bias-mitigation, vulnerability-aware, and privacy-preserving objective for Defensive RAG systems as follows: 

LDefRAG = Eq∼Q 

[ ∑

> d∈D q

(

(1 − T (d)) + P(d)+ B(d)

)

· Rel( q, d )

]

(8) where:  

> •

Q is the distribution over user queries q. 

> •

Dq is the set of retrieved documents for query q. 

> •

Rel( q, d ) ∈ [0 , 1] is the retrieval relevance score between q

and d. 

> •

T (d) ∈ [0 , 1] is the probability that document d is non-toxic.  

> •

P(d) ∈ [0 , 1] is the probability that document d contains private or sensitive content.  

> •

B(d) ∈ [0 , 1] is the bias score of document d.This formulation penalizes documents that are toxic, biased, or privacy-sensitive. Intuitively, (1 − T (d)) + P(d) + B(d)estimates the expected harm associated with a retrieved doc-ument, while multiplication with Rel( q, d ) penalizes harmful documents in proportion to how influential they would be in generation. Documents that are both highly relevant and highly risky thus receive large penalties, encouraging the system to either exclude them or replace them with safer alternatives. In practice, this objective can be realized through filtering, reweighting, or constrained optimization over the retrieved set. Algorithm 3 outlines the core retrieval logic used in defensive RAG pipelines, illustrating how safety and fairness constraints can be integrated into the retrieval loop. Algorithm 3 implements a filtered document selection loop that enforces ethical and safety constraints during retrieval. Candidate documents are first retrieved using a standard rel-evance function and are then re-scored using toxicity, privacy, and bias estimates before being passed to the generator. Simi-lar filtering and reweighting strategies appear in systems such as FILCO [63], SELF-RAG [47], and LLM-based reranking pipelines [72], which dynamically rescore documents using signals linked to safety, factuality, or alignment with system policies. These approaches illustrate how retrieval itself can be treated as a controllable, safety-critical component rather than a neutral preprocessing step. 11 

Algorithm 3 Bias-, Privacy-, and Safety-Aware Defensive RAG 

Require: Query q, corpus C, scoring models T , P, B, rele-vance function Rel 

Ensure: Filtered document set Dsafe , generated response ˆ y 

> 1:

qvec ← ϕq (q) ▷ Encode query  

> 2:

Dcand ← RetrieveTopK( qvec , C) 

> 3:

for all d ∈ Dcand do  

> 4:

Compute relevance Rel( q, d ) 

> 5:

Compute risk score: Sd ← (1 − T (d)) + P(d) + B(d) 

> 6:

Compute safe-weighted score: ˜Rel( q, d ) ← Rel( q, d ) ·

(1 − Sd) 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Dsafe ← SelectTop( Dcand , ˜Rel)  

> 9:

ˆy ← G (q, D safe ) 

> 10:

return ˆy

3.2.1 Filtering, Reranking, and Retrieval-Aware Critique 

A first family of defensive methods treats retrieval itself as a controllable, safety-critical stage by filtering, reranking, or critiquing candidate evidence before it reaches the generator. One subgroup shows how the choice of retrieved context can steer model behavior: UPRISE uses universal prompt retrieval to dynamically select task-relevant prompts from curated pools, enabling LLMs to perform well on unseen tasks without manual prompt tuning [99]. Although initially focused on prompt retrieval rather than document-level RAG, it demonstrated that retrieved context functions as a control mechanism influencing both the style and content of gener-ation. At the document level, the FILCO framework applies fine-grained filtering to select high-quality documents after retrieval, improving factual alignment and reducing halluci-nation; in effect, FILCO performs the risk-aware re-scoring of 

˜Rel( q, d ) that Algorithm 3 applies before passing documents to the generator [63]. LLMs were also found useful not only as generators but as rerankers and retrieval-aware critics. While LLMs often struggle with few-shot information extraction, they can be highly effective as rerankers for hard-to-disambiguate queries, allowing initial candidate documents to be filtered or re-scored before final generation [72]. The synergy between retrieval and generation was pushed further by SELF-RAG, which combines retrieval, generation, and a learned critique model to increase factuality; SELF-RAG effectively implements the cri-tique loop implicit in Algorithm 3, re-querying and re-scoring evidence whenever a learned quality-estimation signal for the current output falls below a threshold [47]. These retrieval-aware critique mechanisms show how defensive behavior can be built directly into the architecture rather than bolted on as an external safety filter, giving models a natural interface for applying policy constraints when certain topics or evidence types warrant additional scrutiny. 

3.2.2 Bias, Fairness, and Sociocultural Safety 

Beyond factual reliability, a growing body of work investi-gates fairness and ethical concerns in RAG systems. Studies such as [100] and [101] revealed persistent demographic and cultural biases in retrieved and generated outputs, indicat-ing that retrieval may replicate or amplify existing societal stereotypes. These findings were reinforced by [102], which questioned the objectivity of LLM-based evaluation pipelines in domains with high sociocultural sensitivity and highlighted the need for domain-aware retrieval strategies that account for the trustworthiness and appropriateness of external knowl-edge sources. As RAG systems increasingly mediate access to information, such biases risk reinforcing misinformation or systemic prejudice at scale, since the combination of biased retrieval and uncritical generation can present skewed or harmful content as authoritative. In terms of the defensive objective, this line of work targets the bias term B(d), ar-guing that fairness and safety must be treated as end-to-end properties of the RAG pipeline rather than attributes of the language model alone, and motivating the integration of bias detectors, content filters, and policy constraints across retrieval and generation stages. Figure 5 illustrates how user-in-the-loop mechanisms re-structure retrieval through clarification, iterative refinement, and contextual adjustment-concepts that parallel the defen-sive filtering, safety-aware reranking, and bias suppression strategies discussed here. Although the figure primarily high-lights interactive RAG, similar design principles apply when humans or policy modules provide feedback on retrieved ev-idence and generated outputs, closing the loop between user preferences, safety constraints, and system behavior. 

3.2.3 Privacy, Leakage, and Adversarial Robustness 

A third family of methods addresses the privacy and adver-sarial risks that arise when retrieval draws on external or un-trusted corpora, corresponding to the privacy term P(d) in the defensive objective. Foundational studies compared retrieval-based augmentation with fine-tuning for injecting external knowledge, highlighting trade-offs between flexibility, safety, and control [103], while analyses of RAG failure modes doc-umented engineering bottlenecks such as hallucination per-sistence, attribution ambiguity, and irrelevant retrieval [104]. Privacy and information leakage emerged as especially press-ing concerns, as researchers showed how RAG systems might expose sensitive data through unfiltered retrieval, corrupted knowledge bases, or misconfigured access controls [105, 106]. The risk is acute in high-stakes settings: in healthcare, for instance, retrieving sensitive or misaligned documents can lead to ethically problematic outputs or inadvertent disclosure of private information [107, 108]. Several approaches respond by constraining or reshap-ing the retrieval corpus. Some systems use synthetic data as a retrieval corpus to reduce direct exposure of sensi-tive information while still providing useful evidence [109], and others enforce strict access-control policies so that re-trieval respects organizational or regulatory boundaries [110]. Work on adversarial robustness developed strategies to de-tect and neutralize poisoned content in knowledge bases, including defenses proposed in BADRAG and related stud-ies [111, 107, 64]. Filtering-based approaches aim to suppress distracting or malicious documents, while controlled noise injection-introducing random but non-toxic documents-was surprisingly found to improve model calibration and accu-racy by reducing overconfidence [112]. Denial-of-service-style attacks on RAG retrieval were studied as well, emphasizing the need for secure ranking systems and robust retrieval infrastructures [113]. 12 

3.2.4 Verification and Benchmarking 

A final family of work focuses on verifying outputs and benchmarking robustness, complementing retrieval-side filter-ing with post-hoc checks on what the system is willing to assert. The need for such checks is shown by HaluEval, which benchmarks hallucination prevalence across multiple LLMs and emphasizes the role of retrieval filtering in minimizing such errors [114]. Complementing this, chain-of-verification methods validate claims retrieved from external sources be-fore generation, allowing models to cross-check evidence and flag inconsistencies [115], while multilingual robustness tech-niques [116] and factual boundary analysis [117] improve un-certainty estimation and reduce overconfident errors in sparse or misaligned settings. Benchmarking efforts emerged to evaluate RAG robust-ness and factual consistency more systematically. IRSC and UDA proposed real-world and zero-shot benchmarks for measuring resilience under distribution shift and noisy re-trieval [118, 119], BERGEN provided a modular library for unified evaluation across diverse datasets and metrics [120], and domain-specific metrics such as Face4RAG for Chinese factuality evaluation emphasized the need for culturally in-formed evaluation pipelines [121]. Fairness concerns [122] were examined in Towards Fair RAG [65, 123], which showed how retrieval ranking can skew information exposure and exacerbate representational imbalances. Collectively, these developments define the emerging field of Defensive RAG: by combining filtering, reranking, uncertainty modeling, bias mitigation, privacy preservation, and ethical safeguards, these systems move beyond naive retrieval toward principled, risk-aware architectures. Defensive RAG thus complements the efficiency-focused axis by emphasizing not just how much and how fast we retrieve, but also what we retrieve and how safely it can be used. 

Key Takeaways & Insights 

Defensive RAG research highlights the growing need for ro-bustness, trustworthiness, and ethical safeguards in retrieval-augmented systems. The literature emphasizes that factual reliability depends not only on retrieving relevant evidence but also on filtering out toxic, biased, misleading, or privacy-sensitive documents, as formalized in Eq. (8) and Algorithm 3, establishing retrieval as a controllable, safety-critical compo-nent of the pipeline rather than a neutral preprocessing step. Despite this progress, Defensive RAG faces several limita-tions and failure modes that remain open challenges. Current approaches struggle with reliably detecting subtle bias, pri-vacy risks, and toxic content, and safety filters may incorrectly suppress benign documents or fail to block harmful ones. Retrieval-scoring methods remain sensitive to adversarial or noisy corpora, and systems can still over-retrieve mislead-ing evidence, under-retrieve safe but essential information, or propagate biases embedded in external knowledge bases. Existing work does not fully address the difficulty of jointly optimizing relevance, safety, and fairness, nor the problem of ensuring robustness under distribution shift, poisoned docu-ments, or large-scale misinformation campaigns. For practitioners, deploying Defensive RAG requires adopting risk-aware scoring, performing rigorous filtering and reranking of retrieved documents, and monitoring failure cases such as hallucinations, leakage, and biased responses. Applying verification or self-reflection mechanisms when un-certainty is high, and carefully designing privacy controls, fairness-sensitive retrieval policies, and adversarial resilience strategies are critical for safe deployment in sensitive do-mains. These practices can help bridge the gap between research prototypes and production-ready systems, ensuring that retrieval-augmented architectures are not only powerful but also responsible and trustworthy in real-world use. 

3.8 Interactive, User-Centric RAG Systems 

Traditional RAG systems are typically designed around static retrieval pipelines that optimize document relevance with respect to a query. However, such pipelines often ignore the dynamic, user-driven nature of real-world interactions, where user goals may shift over time, context evolves across turns, and retrieved knowledge must adapt accordingly. In many deployed systems, retrieval remains fixed and query-only, even though users provide rich signals through feedback, preferences, and interaction history. This axis of the taxonomy captures RAG architectures that are interactive, user-aware, and context-sensitive, enabling LLMs to refine, adapt, or per-sonalize their retrieval and generation processes based on user intent and evolving input. These systems aim to move from a one-shot, query-centric view toward iterative, session-based behavior that reflects long-term user needs. Given the growing volume of work that explicitly models user intent, feedback, and personalization over time [48, 66, 67, 68], interactive, user-centric RAG constitutes a distinct axis in the taxonomy, separate from purely efficiency- or defense-oriented methods. We define a user-conditioned, interaction-aware objective for interactive RAG systems as: 

LInterRAG = E(q,u )∼U 

[ ∑

> d∈D q,u

(

α S (q, d ) + β H (u, d )+ γ F (d, u )

)

πu(d | q)

]

(9) where:  

> •

U is the distribution over query–user pairs ( q, u ).  

> •

Dq,u is the set of retrieved documents for query q and user u. 

> •

S(q, d ) ∈ [0 , 1] is the semantic relevance score between query q and document d. 

> •

H(u, d ) ∈ [0 , 1] is the historical interaction alignment score between user u and document d. 

> •

F (d, u ) ∈ [0 , 1] is the feedback compatibility score esti-mating how well document d aligns with user preferences.  

> •

πu(d | q) is the user-conditioned document selection policy.  

> •

α, β, γ ∈ R+ are tunable weights controlling the trade-off between query relevance, historical consistency, and personalization. Intuitively, this objective encourages the system to select documents that are simultaneously semantically relevant to the current query ( S), consistent with the user’s prior in-teractions or history ( H), and compatible with explicit or implicit feedback signals ( F ). The weights α, β, γ govern how strongly each of these dimensions contributes to the final score, while the user-conditioned policy πu(d | q) translates 13 

Algorithm 4 Interactive, User-Aware RAG Pipeline 

Require: Query q, user profile u, document corpus C, selec-tion policy πu, scoring functions S, H, F

Ensure: Personalized context Dq,u and generated response ˆ y 

> 1:

qvec ← ϕq (q) ▷ Encode query  

> 2:

Dcand ← RetrieveTopK( qvec , C) 

> 3:

for all d ∈ Dcand do  

> 4:

Compute S(q, d ) ▷ Query–document semantic relevance  

> 5:

Compute H(u, d ) ▷ User history alignment score  

> 6:

Compute F (d, u ) ▷ Feedback/personalization score  

> 7:

Compute total score: Rd ← αS (q, d ) + βH (u, d ) + 

γF (d, u ) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

πu(d | q) ← Softmax over Rd 

> 10:

Sample Dq,u ∼ πu(d | q) ▷ Personalized document selection  

> 11:

ˆy ← G (q, D q,u ) ▷ Generate response with selected context  

> 12:

return ˆy

these scores into a personalized distribution over documents. In practice, these quantities may be implemented using neural scorers, heuristic features, or combinations thereof, but the objective highlights the shared goal of aligning retrieval with evolving user intent. This formulation captures the essence of interactive RAG: retrieval is no longer purely query-driven but shaped by user identity, history, and feedback. The end-to-end interactive personalization pipeline is de-scribed in Algorithm 4. Algorithm 4 outlines a retrieval–generation loop that inte-grates user feedback, profile information, and intent modeling to personalize outputs. Given a query and user identity, can-didate documents are scored not just by semantic relevance to the query ( S(q, d )) but also by how well they align with the user’s historical interactions ( H(u, d )) and expressed or inferred preferences ( F (d, u )). A learned or heuristic docu-ment selection policy πu combines these scores and samples a final set of documents Dq,u to serve as input context for the generator. This interactive loop enables adaptation over sessions, dynamic query expansion, and alignment with user expectations, making it well-suited for recommendation, con-versational agents, and domain-specific assistants. Variants of this pipeline are instantiated in systems such as Chat-REC [48], ERAGent [67], PersonaRAG [66], and adaptive conversational RAG frameworks [124], which implement user-aware scoring and policy-based document selection. Figure 5 (introduced earlier) conceptually contrasts naive RAG with interactive architectures that incorporate user feedback, in-tent clarification, and iterative refinement, mirroring the com-ponents formalized in Algorithm 4. 

3.3.1 Intent Clarification and Information-Seeking 

A first family of interactive RAG work focuses on closing the gap between a user’s initial query and their actual information need, treating clarification and proactive question-asking as part of the retrieval loop. The introduction of metaprompts, as proposed in Prompt Programming for LLMs: Beyond the Few-Shot Paradigm , enabled models to generate their own prompts based on task goals, shifting the burden of instruc-tion design away from the user [125]. This approach demon-strated that well-structured zero-shot prompts could match or even outperform traditional few-shot examples, especially in general-purpose reasoning tasks. However, despite improving the interface between user input and model response, this strategy remained fundamentally reactive: models could only operate within the constraints of the given prompt and could not independently identify or seek missing information. Addressing this constraint, ISEEQ framed LLMs as in-teractive agents capable of generating Information-Seeking Questions (ISQs) to clarify, refine, or expand a user’s ini-tial query [68]. By leveraging knowledge graphs and dy-namic meta-information retrieval, the system enriched se-mantic representations of user intent and enabled models to initiate clarifying sub-questions during generation, integrat-ing a knowledge-aware passage retriever with a generative-adversarial reinforcement learning framework [126] to keep those questions coherent and retrieval-relevant. This marked a conceptual shift from static prompt execution to dialogue-like, multi-turn interaction in which the model actively queries external knowledge in response to internal uncertainty. The same proactive philosophy motivated generate-then-read paradigms such as GENREAD , which reversed the traditional retrieve-then-generate pipeline by letting LLMs synthesize their own contextual documents before generating an an-swer [127]. While promising in terms of focus and relevance, this raised questions about factual grounding and led to hy-brid strategies that combine generative context construction with retrieval-based verification. Together, these early meth-ods established a key design principle for interactive RAG: user intent must be modeled explicitly, and retrieval should respond not only to the initial query but also to evolving information needs. 

3.3.2 Personalization and Dialogue-Driven Retrieval 

A second family of systems adapts retrieval and generation to individual users and to the evolving state of a conversation, instantiating the historical-alignment term H(u, d ) and feed-back term F (d, u ) of the interactive objective. One thread tar-gets stylistic adaptation: Diversify Question Generation with Retrieval-Augmented Style Transfer shows that retrieval can support not only factual accuracy but also creative diversity, adapting outputs to user tone, task framing, or information preferences [128]. Personalization and transparency were ex-plored more directly in systems like Chat-REC , which embed-ded RAG within recommender systems to enhance explain-ability and interactive refinement, treating user interaction history as a dynamic prompt space and retrieving contextual cues to personalize recommendations in real time [48]. This history-driven selection is precisely what the user-conditioned policy πu(d | q) in Algorithm 4 is meant to capture. For explicit user modeling, PersonaRAG and Adaptive RAG for Conversational Systems use user-specific modeling and adap-tive retrieval invocation to reduce redundancy and improve fluency in open-ended conversations [66, 124]; PersonaRAG in particular scores documents against an explicit user profile, operationalizing the historical-alignment term H(u, d ) that distinguishes interactive retrieval from purely query-driven retrieval. Personalization also proved valuable in instructional and assistive settings. Personalized learning systems leveraged 14 

Fig. 5: Comparison between Normal RAG and Interactive, User-Centric RAG architectures. RAG to deliver contextually appropriate content, as seen in applications for children with developmental disabilities [129] and in feedback generation from lecture materials in pro-gramming education [130], while RAMO and MOOC-RAG 

addressed course recommendation by drawing on course cat-alogs and student behavior [131]. Dialogue-driven retrieval was further extended toward diverse viewpoints, as multi-perspective query interfaces surfaced contrasting positions via RAG-enhanced synthesis [132]. The same task-adaptive instinct appeared in high-precision applications, where inter-active RAG was evaluated on math question answering [133], intelligence reporting [134], and cross-lingual information ac-cess [135]; in each case retrieval was tuned to the user task and optimized for objectives such as factuality, contextual align-ment, or language sensitivity, marking a shift from retrieval-as-lookup to retrieval-as-dialogue. 

3.3.3 Retriever-LLM Alignment and Agent Architectures 

A third family of work concerns how interactive systems are built-aligning retrievers with LLM needs and assembling modular, agent-like architectures around the retrieval loop. One subgroup treats retrieval as something the model actively manages: Teaching LLMs to Self-Debug provides mechanisms for evaluating and improving the model’s own retrieval choices and reasoning chains [136], while Active RAG treats retrieval as a dynamic decision space rather than a fixed preprocessing step [137]. Flexible retrieval substrates supported these be-haviors: LLM-Embedder provided a unified embedding model for cross-source retrieval, accommodating user demonstra-tions, memory stores, and structured databases within a single framework [138], and document- or tool-oriented interaction was enabled by RAG-based form filling and structured input parsing [139] and by TableGPT , which unified interaction with tables, commands, and natural language through external functional interfaces [140]. Multimodal grounding extended these architectures beyond text, as MiniGPT-4 incorporated image-grounded context into generation [141] and mPLUG-Owl demonstrated modular designs combining vision, audio, and text retrieval [142]. A central challenge in this family is the divergence between retriever relevance scoring and the actual utility of retrieved content for LLM inference. This “preference gap” was directly addressed in Bridging the Preference Gap between Retrievers and LLMs , which argued that retrievers must be trained not only for surface relevance but for alignment with model rea-soning and user-specific information needs-in effect learning the user-conditioned policy πu(d | q) rather than a generic rel-evance score [143]. Related training-time strategies included 

RA-DIT , which applied dual instruction tuning to both re-triever and generator for holistic alignment [144], and RADA, which generated training samples via retrieval-guided context construction, shifting RAG from a purely inference-time tool to one that also shapes model training [145]. Modular agent architectures brought these components together: ERAGent 

presented a RAG agent equipped with question rewriting, re-trieval triggers, knowledge filtering, and user-specific reading modules-a concrete instantiation of the rewrite-trigger-filter-read pipeline formalized in Algorithm 4 [67]-while IM-RAG 15 

modeled internal reasoning chains via learned inner mono-logues across retrieval rounds to enhance context continuity in dialogue [146]. Interactive RAG was also extended to new modalities and to transparency: RAG was applied to large-scale video libraries [147], RAG-Ex introduced explainable pipelines that let users trace how each retrieved chunk con-tributed to the output [148], and PromptBench offered a unified framework for evaluating prompt-response dynamics across LLMs and RAG configurations [149]. Across these three families, interactive, user-centric RAG combines intent clarification and information-seeking ques-tion generation, personalization and dialogue-driven retrieval, and retriever-LLM alignment within agent architectures to support dynamic, personalized, and multimodal interaction. Intent-clarification methods structure input and enable LLMs to proactively seek missing context; personalization and dialogue-driven methods incorporate user profiles, dialogue history, and domain-specific knowledge to guide retrieval and generation; and alignment-focused methods use inner-monologue reasoning, retriever-LLM alignment, and explain-able outputs to redefine RAG as an interactive, user-aware layer within intelligent systems. This trajectory reflects a fundamental shift from static augmentation to real-time, adaptive knowledge integration, positioning RAG as a central component in human-aligned, feedback-driven AI. 

Key Takeaways & Insights 

Interactive, user-centric RAG systems represent a major shift from static, query-only retrieval pipelines toward adaptive, intent-aware, and personalized knowledge integration. Algo-rithm 4 formalizes this paradigm by integrating semantic rel-evance, historical alignment, and user feedback (Eq. (9)) into a unified scoring and sampling policy for document selection, treating retrieval as a dynamic loop rather than a one-shot preprocessing step. Across domains such as recommendation, education, and cross-lingual information access, interactive RAG mechanisms improve contextual alignment, enhance transparency, and support richer user-driven workflows by incorporating user profiles, preference modeling, and adaptive reasoning strategies. Despite these advances, key limitations and failure modes remain. Interactive RAG systems often rely on incomplete or brittle user models that may misinterpret intent, overfit to short-term interaction history, or incorrectly generalize user preferences across contexts. Personalization signals may con-flict with semantic relevance, leading to retrieval of documents that align with user history but degrade factual accuracy. Feedback signals can be noisy or ambiguous, causing insta-bility in sampling-based policies such as πu(d | q); inter-active agents may over-query, under-query, or reinforce user misconceptions. Systems built on multimodal pipelines suffer from cascading errors and misalignment between components, while proactive querying approaches may introduce additional latency, compounding retrieval costs. Existing work does not fully resolve how to balance personalization with safety, how to reconcile divergent user preferences in multi-user or col-laborative settings, or how to evaluate user-centric retrieval across diverse tasks and modalities. For practitioners, effec-tive deployment requires careful calibration of personalization weights, mechanisms for uncertainty-aware query expansion, transparent feedback channels, and alignment checks that ensure retrieved context remains factual, relevant, and ap-propriate for the user’s goals. As interactive RAG becomes more deeply integrated into real-world systems, robust user modeling, adaptive retrieval policies, and principled evalua-tion frameworks will be essential to support reliable and user-aligned performance. 

3.9 RAG for Complex Reasoning and Multi-Step Tasks 

While baseline RAG systems focus primarily on factual grounding and information retrieval, complex real-world tasks often demand structured reasoning, multi-step planning, and sequential decision-making. In such settings, simply retrieving a static set of documents and generating a one-shot answer is rarely sufficient, since solutions must integrate evidence across multiple hops, track intermediate decisions, and revise earlier assumptions when new information appears. This axis of the taxonomy encompasses RAG architectures that explicitly support or enhance such capabilities, either through integra-tion with symbolic structures, iterative generation pipelines, or domain-specific adaptations for reasoning-intensive tasks. These systems typically interleave retrieval with chain-of-thought–style reasoning, allowing models to query external knowledge at intermediate steps rather than only at the outset. Given the growing volume of work that explores retrieval-conditioned chain-of-thought reasoning, structured state updates, and multi-hop inference across diverse do-mains [69, 49, 70, 71], complex reasoning forms a distinct axis in the taxonomy, separate from efficiency-, safety-, or user-centric RAG. It represents a shift from treating retrieval as a static augmentation mechanism to viewing it as a core component of the reasoning process itself. A reasoning-aligned objective for complex reasoning and multi-step RAG systems can be formally defined as: 

LReason =

> T

∑

> t=1

[

Ert ∼R (ht ) [DKL (pt(yt | ht, r t) ∥ ˆyt)] 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> Retrieval-grounded step loss

+ λ · C(rt, h t)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> Contextual Coherence

+γ · J (ht, h t−1)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> Reasoning Consistency

]

(10) where:  

> •

T : Total number of reasoning steps.  

> •

ht: Hidden state (or intermediate reasoning output) at step t. 

> •

rt ∼ R (ht): Retrieved documents conditioned on ht using the retrieval function R. 

> •

pt(yt | ht, r t): Model’s output distribution at step t,conditioned on prior reasoning and retrieved context.  

> •

ˆyt: Ground-truth or target output at step t. 

> •

DKL : Kullback–Leibler divergence measuring discrep-ancy between the generated and target distribution.  

> •

C(rt, h t): Differentiable coherence function quantifying alignment between retrieved context rt and reasoning state ht. 

> •

J (ht, h t−1): Regularizer penalizing incoherent jumps be-tween successive reasoning states.  

> •

λ, γ : Weighting hyperparameters for coherence and rea-soning consistency. 16 

Algorithm 5 Multi-Step Retrieval-Augmented Reasoning 

Require: Initial query q, retriever R, generator G, reasoning steps T

Ensure: Final output ˆ y 

> 1:

h0 ← Encode( q) ▷ Initial reasoning state from input  

> 2:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 3:

rt ∼ R (ht−1) ▷ Retrieve context based on prior state  

> 4:

yt ← G (ht−1, r t) ▷ Generate intermediate output  

> 5:

ht ← UpdateState( ht−1, y t) ▷ Advance reasoning state  

> 6:

Compute step loss: Lt ← D KL (pt(yt | ht−1, r t) ∥ ˆyt) 

> 7:

Add coherence penalty: Lt ← L t + λ · C (rt, h t) 

> 8:

Add consistency penalty: Lt ← L t + γ · J (ht, h t−1) 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return Final output ˆ y ← yT

Intuitively, this objective captures the interleaved nature of complex reasoning in RAG. The first term ensures that each intermediate generation step is grounded in retrieved evi-dence, rather than relying solely on parametric memory. The coherence term encourages retrieved documents to match the evolving reasoning state, so that context remains relevant as the model’s understanding progresses. The consistency term enforces a stable, logically continuous trajectory across steps, discouraging abrupt or contradictory shifts in intermediate conclusions. Together, these components express the multi-hop, interdependent structure of reasoning in complex RAG pipelines, where retrieval, intermediate states, and final out-puts are tightly coupled. The complete multi-step reasoning pipeline is formalized in Algorithm 5. Algorithm 5 describes a structured reasoning loop in RAG systems designed for multi-hop tasks such as complex question answering, procedural generation, or scientific ex-planation. The process begins by encoding the query into an initial hidden state h0, which represents the model’s initial interpretation of the problem. At each timestep t, relevant documents are retrieved based on the current reasoning state, and this context then conditions the generator to produce an intermediate output yt. The output is used to update the hidden state ht, enabling chained inference and accumulation of partial conclusions over time. Each step is supervised via KL divergence against step-specific ground truths, while coherence and consistency penalties ensure that retrieved content aligns semantically with the current reasoning state and that the reasoning path remains logically valid across timesteps. This formulation mirrors the mechanics of systems such as interleaved retrieval with chain-of-thought reason-ing [69], GenGround [49], and multi-view multi-hop reasoning pipelines that integrate feedback-based retrieval throughout the reasoning chain. Figure 6 visually illustrates the distinc-tion between naive single-shot RAG and multi-step reasoning RAG architectures, aligning with the multi-step flow formal-ized in Algorithm 5. 

3.4.1 Structured and Symbolic Reasoning (Code, Tables, and Knowledge Graphs) 

A first family of complex-reasoning RAG systems operates in structured domains, where the logical form of the data-code, tables, or graphs-forces retrieval to respect task-specific structure rather than treat content as flat text. At the prompt level, UPRISE dynamically selects prompts for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks, reducing reliance on manual instruction design and partially structuring downstream reasoning [150]. In code, Liu et al. introduced a hybrid Graph Neural Network to model local and global code dependencies, integrating retrieval to improve summarization fidelity and logical coher-ence [151]. REDCODER reframes retrieval as an emulation of real-world development workflows rather than a content-fetch mechanism: by mimicking how programmers consult related code snippets, documentation, and examples, it improves both generation quality and task efficiency [152]. Across these approaches-prompt selection, structure-aware retrieval, and task-mimetic workflows-the common requirement is close alignment between the retrieval strategy and the structure of the problem being solved. Beyond code, structured reasoning also spans tables and graphs. T-RAG proposed an end-to-end model that jointly trained dense retrievers and generative decoders for struc-tured table inputs, eliminating the need for separate modules and reducing error propagation, and establishing a template for tightly coupled retrieval-generation architectures in struc-tured settings [153]. Across this application space, core rea-soning limitations in standard LLMs-weak planning, fragile multi-step inference, and limited self-correction-motivate the retrieval-augmented and chain-of-thought–style mitigations discussed throughout this axis. Knowledge-graph ground-ing addressed some of these limitations directly: Knowledge Graph-Augmented Language Models employed structured KG-based retrieval to offer a more interpretable and verifiable grounding layer for dialogue generation [154]. This subgroup also includes dedicated graph-reasoning frameworks such as 

G-Retriever and GRAG , which advance structured ques-tion answering by aligning retrieval with graph traversal paths [71, 155]. Across these systems, retrieval is organized around explicit structure-syntax trees, table schemas, or graph topology-so that evidence selection mirrors the rela-tionships the task depends on. 

3.4.2 Interleaved and Iterative Retrieval 

A second, cross-cutting family makes retrieval part of the reasoning loop itself, fetching new evidence as intermediate conclusions evolve-exactly the structure formalized by the multi-step objective and Algorithm 5. The defining example is Interleaving Retrieval with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning ,which allowed retrieval to occur at each reasoning step, adapt-ing context as the model’s understanding evolved and sub-stantially improving multi-hop performance by fetching new evidence when earlier assumptions proved insufficient [69]; this is precisely the per-step retrieval rt ∼ R (ht) and retrieval-grounded step loss that Algorithm 5 supervises. Related work pushed iterative refinement further: Tree of Clarifications 

introduced a structured decomposition of ambiguous ques-tions so that RAG systems resolve intent before generating final responses [156], while zero-shot information retrieval and entailment-aware filtering enabled models to function in low-supervision settings and reduced the impact of noisy context injection [157, 158]. Auxiliary memory played a complemen-tary role: self-memory mechanisms allow LLMs to revisit and refine previous outputs, improving long-horizon consistency 17 Query  

> Prompt : How can I start a business as a student with less than $500, and scale it to $10k/month in 1 year?
> You can start dropshipping or a tutoring service. Use your savings wisely and reinvest in marketing. a) What are low-capital business models for students? b) How can I market with no money? c) What scaling tactics work in Year 1?
> Response : Month 1–3: Start a freelance design gig using Canva and Upwork (capital: $0–$100). Month 4–6: Reinvest in portfolio site and paid ads. Month 7–12: Scale via referrals + hire 1 contractor. Here's a breakdown by month…
> Retrieves per step

RAG for Complex reasoning 

> Naive RAG

Fig. 6: Illustration of Normal RAG versus Complex Reasoning RAG. While the Naive RAG pipeline retrieves documents and generates a direct response to the initial query, the Complex Reasoning RAG decomposes the query into sub-questions, performs stepwise retrieval, and incrementally builds a structured, multi-step response tailored to complex information needs. and reducing reasoning drift-directly serving the consistency regularizer J (ht, h t−1) that penalizes incoherent jumps be-tween successive reasoning states [159]. Planning and emer-gent reasoning behaviors form a further group, with LLM+P 

improving planning proficiency by aligning retrieval with op-timal policy reasoning [160], studies on Retrieve-and-Sample 

and long-tail knowledge representation examining how RAG handles rare facts [161], and work on analogical reasoning showing that LLMs begin to exhibit human-like analogy formation when scaled and structured appropriately [162]. A further group scales these loops to longer contexts and more explicit planning. Retrieval Meets Long Context LLMs introduced retrieval-enhanced strategies for integrating extensive textual input, a necessity for academic research and case-based analysis [163], and PlanRAG introduced a struc-tured plan-then-retrieve methodology that injects decision-making logic before retrieval so that context selection re-flects task structure [70]. InstructRetro fine-tuned retrieval-pretrained models via instruction tuning so that retrieval was informed by model intent rather than static query similar-ity [164]. Multi-hop reasoning itself was made more flexible: 

GenGround: Generate-then-Ground reversed the standard pipeline by letting the model propose intermediate reasoning steps that are then verified or corrected through targeted retrieval-tightening the coherence term C(rt, h t) between re-trieved context and the evolving reasoning state [49]-while 

Unlocking Multi-View Insights integrated multiple perspec-tives during multi-hop retrieval to improve coverage and contextual coherence [165]. Robustness of the retrieval sub-strate became a concern as these loops grew more power-ful: Black-Box Opinion Manipulation Attacks exposed how retrieval pipelines could be compromised to inject biased or adversarial information [166, 167], prompting missing-information–guided retrieval that identifies gaps in current ev-idence and actively seeks complementary documents [168] and dynamic relevance scoring with entailment-aware filtering, as in DR-RAG , to preserve precision under noisy or adversarial conditions [169]. Layered, multi-intent generation was likewise handled iteratively by RichRAG , which decomposes complex user goals into ordered sub-intents [170]. 

3.4.3 Domain-Specific Complex Reasoning (Medical, Legal, and Mathematical) 

A third family adapts these reasoning mechanisms to high-stakes domains whose corpora, conventions, and accuracy re-quirements demand specialized pipelines. In medicine, LLMs augmented with minimal supervision and retrieval access have been shown to extract clinically relevant data and encode medical knowledge effectively [171], and knowledge-grounded conversation benefited from retrieving and fusing external documents to produce more informative, context-aware dia-logue that adapts its retrieval choices to unpredictable user input [172]. Domain adaptability was tackled head-on by 

Improving the Domain Adaptation of RAG Models , which combined multi-domain fine-tuning and retrieval optimization to improve open-domain question answering across new set-tings [173], while reading-comprehension–style training was used to facilitate knowledge transfer across domains [174]. High-stakes and formal domains received targeted treatment: in mathematics, MATHPROMPTER extended RAG to for-mal reasoning by retrieving formulas and theorems relevant to natural-language problems [175]; in medicine, Almanac and 

Towards Expert-Level Medical Question Answering grounded retrieval in trusted medical corpora to increase factual ac-curacy and safety [176]; and in scientific synthesis, PaperQA 18 

TABLE 3: Performance metrics of QA-centric Retrieval-Augmented Generation models across multiple evaluation criteria. “-” indicates data not reported.                                                    

> Method Dataset / Setting Accuracy / F1 Hallucination /Consistency Retrieval Effectiveness FoRAG WebGPT (en), WebCPM (zh) Factuality: 0.82–0.99 Coherence: 0.91–0.98 Training Time (Holis-tic): 33.1h
> WeKnow-RAG 4domains, classification, chunk-size eval Accuracy: 0.10–0.41 Hallucination: 0.025–0.35 Confidence-aware re-trieval analysis
> GenGround HotpotQA, MuSiQue, StrategyQA F1: 27.3–52.3 Semantic Acc: 24.7–55.7 -
> FRAMES Internal multi-hop QA benchmark Acc: 0.408–0.729 -Prompting strategy comparison
> Adobe RAG Adobe product corpus nDCG: 0.692–0.822 -Dataset coverage breakdown
> Self-RAG (TA-ARE) RetrievalQA (various LLMs) Match Acc: 6.0–46.4 -Retrieval Acc: up to 100%
> QA-RAG RAPTOR, HFusion, QR-Fusion BLEU-1: up to 1.33; METEOR: 0.99 ROUGE-L: 0.9 (best) Multi-type QA re-trieval fusion
> RQ-RAG ARC, POPQA, 2Wiki, MUSIQUE Acc: 41.7–79.4 -Retrieval Source Comparison (Wiki, DDG, Bing)
> PRCA SQuAD, HotpotQA, Top-iQCQA --Contextual Adapter across 3 QA datasets
> Face4RAG Synthetic + Real QA data (Chinese) -Pos Rate: 30–63% Segment-level evalua-tion

expanded RAG’s reach into long-context, evidence-based re-search workflows [177]. Domain specialization extends to more demanding deploy-ments. In the medical domain, Development and Testing of RAG for Preoperative Instruction Generation stressed precise, interpretable reasoning for high-stakes deployments [178], and i-MedRAG improved medical QA by enabling dynamic, iterative question refinement throughout a reasoning tra-jectory [179]. In law, CBR-RAG fused retrieval with case-based reasoning, retrieving legal precedents and aligning them with user queries [180] to emulate expert legal reasoning patterns [181]. Engineering and education were addressed by SAPPhIRE modeling with RAG , which supported design-rationale retrieval and structured explanation [182], and by 

Lecture-RAG for Feedback Generation , which tailored feed-back based on lecture content and student performance [183]. Evaluation kept pace with these domain-specific demands: 

FACT, FETCH, AND REASON introduced FRAMES, a benchmark for reasoning fidelity across fact-checking, re-trieval precision, and multi-hop inference [21]; DomainRAG 

and Benchmarking RAG for Medicine highlighted the impor-tance of field-adapted datasets for understanding reasoning under real-world constraints [184, 185]; and Automated Exam Generation for RAG Models probed reasoning depth and ro-bustness using exam-style questions [186]. Table 3 summarizes representative QA-centric systems across these accuracy, con-sistency, and retrieval-effectiveness dimensions, while Table 8 details retrieval and reasoning metrics for representative legal and scientific RAG systems such as CaseGPT, CBR-RAG, LegalBench-RAG, and HyPA-RAG. Taken together, complex-reasoning RAG spans structured and symbolic retrieval over code, tables, and graphs; inter-leaved and iterative retrieval woven into the reasoning loop; and domain-specific pipelines for high-stakes settings such as medicine and law. Across these families, the unifying principle is retrieval-mediated rather than retrieval-enhanced reason-ing: structured memory, symbolic representations, multi-view retrieval, and dynamic feedback are combined so that retrieval participates in each reasoning step rather than only at the outset, positioning RAG as a central enabler of trustworthy, adaptive, and structured intelligence. 

Key Takeaways & Insights 

RAG systems for complex reasoning and multi-step tasks mark a transition from single-shot factual grounding to struc-tured, iterative inference that more closely resembles human problem solving. The objective in Eq. (10) and the multi-step procedure in Algorithm 5 formalize this paradigm by su-pervising each reasoning step with retrieval-grounded losses, enforcing semantic coherence between retrieved context and intermediate states, and regularizing the consistency of the reasoning trajectory across timesteps. Together, the methods surveyed in this axis form a rich design space that blends symbolic structure, auxiliary memory, dynamic retrieval, and iterative feedback to support planning, counterfactuals, and high-stakes decision-making far beyond naive retrieve-then-read pipelines. At the same time, current approaches exhibit impor-tant limitations and characteristic failure modes. Multi-step architectures are vulnerable to error accumulation: spuri-ous intermediate steps, poorly decomposed sub-questions, or misaligned retrieval at early timesteps can cascade into incoherent final answers, even when individual components (retriever, generator, planner) perform well in isolation. Re-trieval triggers and step counts are often heuristic, leading to over-retrieval that bloats context and under-retrieval that starves later reasoning stages of critical evidence; long-context methods can still lose track of earlier steps or rely on shallow pattern matching rather than genuine multi-hop reasoning. Benchmarks, while increasingly sophisticated, only partially 19 

capture real-world requirements such as robustness to adver-sarially injected evidence, domain shift, and incomplete or missing information, leaving gaps in how reasoning fidelity is measured and optimized [166, 168, 169]. For practitioners, effective use of complex-reasoning RAG entails constraining the number of reasoning steps, instrumenting systems to log and inspect intermediate states, and combining interleaved retrieval with explicit decomposition, clarification, and verifi-cation (e.g., missing-information–guided retrieval, entailment-aware filtering, multi-view evidence checks). It is crucial to tune retrieval and planning jointly, prioritize trusted, domain-specific corpora in high-stakes applications, and evaluate on multi-hop, domain-adapted benchmarks to ensure that added architectural complexity translates into more reliable, inter-pretable, and safe reasoning rather than merely longer chains of brittle steps. 

## 4 Applications of RAG-LLMs 

The applications discussed in this section span all four axes of the taxonomy developed in §3: open-domain QA benefits primarily from compression and efficiency techniques (§3.6) and complex reasoning architectures (§3.9); code generation leverages interactive, retriever-generator alignment strategies (§3.8); and educational and corporate deployments require both defensive safeguards (§3.7) and personalization from interactive RAG (§3.8). Within each subsection, we dis-tinguish between research benchmark systems -which demon-strate RAG capabilities on controlled evaluation tasks-and 

deployed applications , which face real-world constraints of reliability, privacy, latency, and domain specificity. We or-ganize our discussion along a spectrum that progresses from canonical research benchmarks to cross-domain generalization and finally to production systems. Open-domain question answering (§4.1) remains the foundational use case: RAG was originally introduced to address knowledge-intensive QA tasks [45], and the ODQA literature consequently repre-sents the most mature body of retrieval-augmented meth-ods, evaluation protocols, and failure-mode analyses. Code generation (§4.2) serves as a critical test of RAG’s ability to generalize beyond natural-language prose into structured, syntactic domains where retrieval must respect programming-language semantics and repository-level context [187, 188]. Finally, educational and corporate deployments (§4.3) cap-ture RAG’s transition from research prototype to produc-tion infrastructure-encompassing intelligent tutoring systems, enterprise knowledge management, and institutional work-flows that must satisfy reliability, privacy, and scalability constraints absent in benchmark settings [189, 190]. Together these three areas span the full arc of RAG application ma-turity while remaining tractable for substantive quantitative comparison. 

4.1 Information Retrieval and Question Answering 

Research Systems. Open-domain Question Answering (ODQA) has seen substantial improvement through the in-tegration of RAG techniques with Large Language Models (LLMs). Much of the recent work focuses on enhancing answer accuracy, factual grounding, and coherence while reducing hallucinations. FoRAG improves long-form QA by combining an outline-enhanced generator with a doubly fine-grained RLHF framework to address factual inaccuracies and logical inconsistencies [191]. WeKnow-RAG incorporates Web search and Knowledge Graphs to strengthen retrieval robustness, us-ing multi-stage retrieval and self-assessment to minimize hal-lucinations [192]. The Generate-then-Ground (GenGround) framework alternates between answer deduction and knowl-edge grounding, offering a more flexible approach to multi-hop reasoning compared to rigid retrieve-then-read pipelines [193]. Collectively, these systems highlight a trend toward richer re-trieval pipelines that dynamically refine context and improve factual reliability in ODQA. 

Benchmarks and Evaluation. Alongside model innova-tion, recent progress has produced comprehensive evalua-tion frameworks and datasets tailored for RAG-based QA. FRAMES (Factuality, Retrieval, And reasoning MEasure-ment Set) provides a unified benchmark for assessing factual accuracy, retrieval precision, and reasoning fidelity across challenging multi-hop questions [21]. A domain-specific RAG framework for Adobe products addresses the limitations of general-purpose models by leveraging retrieval over propri-etary corpora and user-behavior data [194]. RetrievalQA, a benchmark of 1,271 questions, evaluates Adaptive RAG (ARAG) methods and introduces Time-Aware Adaptive Re-trieval (TA-ARE), which adjusts retrieval depth without ad-ditional fine-tuning [195]. These resources reflect a growing emphasis on systematic evaluation and highlight the need for QA systems that integrate knowledge more effectively, refine reasoning steps, and operate reliably across diverse contexts. Beyond evaluation frameworks, several recent systems tar-get improvements in context representation, refinement, and factual consistency. QA-RAG enhances context structuring by transforming retrieved evidence into question–answer pairs, reducing hallucinations and improving grounding [196]. RQ-RAG introduces dynamic query refinement to better handle complex or ambiguous questions, yielding performance gains in both single-hop and multi-hop QA tasks [197]. PRCA proposes a Pluggable Reward-Driven Contextual Adapter that filters and restructures retrieved information before it is passed to a black-box LLM, improving ReQA per-formance without full-model fine-tuning [198]. Face4RAG provides a benchmark for evaluating Chinese RAG sys-tems and introduces L-Face4RAG for detecting logical fal-lacies and assessing reasoning quality [199]. These develop-ments collectively demonstrate increasing attention to re-trieval–generation alignment and error detection across lan-guages and domains, as well as the need for methods robust to varied error distributions. Table 3 presents a consolidated view of RAG mod-els designed for open-domain and multi-hop QA. Systems such as FoRAG and QA-RAG demonstrate strong factu-ality and BLEU-based performance, while frameworks like WeKnow-RAG emphasize hallucination mitigation and con-fidence calibration. Table 4 complements this view with per-formance data for RAG systems designed specifically for security- and fairness-sensitive settings, such as Poisone-dRAG, BadRAG, and FairRAG, illustrating the additional safeguards required when QA is deployed in adversarial or regulated environments-concerns that directly connect to the Defensive RAG axis discussed in §3.7. GenGround and RQ-RAG highlight the importance of iterative retrieval strate-gies for complex question decomposition, and Self-RAG and 20 

TABLE 4: Overview of Security, Fairness, and Privacy-focused RAG Systems                 

> Model Datasets / Evaluation Context Key Metrics / Findings
> PoisonedRAG NQ, HotpotQA, MS-MARCO ASR: 0.97–0.99; F1-Score: 0.96–1.00 RAG (CoCondenser + MiniLM) Government, Education, Society, Health ASR: 0.17–0.50; ASV: –0.17 to 0.67 RC-RAG Internal eval on ChatGPT and Mistral Risk: 14.94–19.00; Carefulness: 52.87–65.37 Towards Fair RAG Exposure Disparity Benchmarks EE-D: 0.14; EE-R: 0.28 LLaMA2-7B-Chat Health, Enron Attacks ROUGE Prompts: 73–111; Repeat Contexts: 55–135 BadRAG GPT-4, Claude-3 Evaluation Retrieval Success: 98.9%; Rejection Rate: 74.6% SAGE HealthcareMagic, Wiki-PII BLEU-1: 0.01–0.11; ROUGE-L: 0.02–0.09

TA-ARE showcase retrieval improvements through filtering, thresholding, and temporal adaptation. Across benchmarks such as HotpotQA, StrategyQA, SQuAD, and domain-specific corpora, recent results reflect a clear trend toward tighter re-trieval–generation coupling and improved context-aware rea-soning. This diversity underscores the expanding landscape of QA-centric RAG systems and the wide range of evaluation methodologies used to study them. Looking forward, several challenges remain central for the next generation of RAG-based QA systems. These include the integration of heterogeneous knowledge sources, improved robustness in query reformulation, and consistent factual grounding across diverse tasks and domains. As real-world in-formation needs become more dynamic and domain-sensitive, future RAG systems must offer stronger reasoning capabil-ities, more adaptive retrieval pipelines, and more reliable calibration under uncertainty. Continued progress in these directions will be essential for building trustworthy, high-utility ODQA systems capable of supporting both general-purpose and specialized information retrieval. 

4.2 Retrieval-Based Code Generation 

RAG has also demonstrated strong utility in code generation and synthesis, particularly in scenarios involving domain-specific languages, rare programming patterns, or large, het-erogeneous codebases [200]. This subsection reviews both deployed, user-facing coding assistants and research systems that are not themselves shipped products but demonstrate the application potential of retrieval-augmented techniques in this domain; we distinguish between the two explicitly below. By augmenting LLMs with relevant code snippets, documentation, and usage examples, RAG systems improve context awareness and help models generalize beyond memo-rized patterns. This is especially valuable in zero-shot or few-shot settings where the model lacks extensive prior exposure to a particular API or language. 

Deployed Applications. GitHub Copilot [201], Amazon CodeWhisperer, and ChatGPT-based [1] coding assistance are the most widely used production tools in this space. As Table 5 reflects, these systems are characterized by product-level features-IDE integration, language coverage, reference/-explanation support, and pricing-rather than the held-out quantitative benchmarks reported for research systems, since their evaluation criteria for end users are usability and cover-age rather than benchmark accuracy. 

Research Systems. A representative system is ProCC [202], which combines prompt-based retrieval with a contextual multi-armed bandit algorithm to dynamically choose among multiple semantic perspectives of source code. By leveraging a multi-retriever architecture and adaptive retrieval policies, ProCC improves alignment between retrieved examples and user intent. It demonstrates significant performance gains over strong baselines and generalizes effectively across both open-source and proprietary codebases, highlighting the value of retrieval diversity in code-related tasks. Retrieval has also proven valuable for synthesizing programs in rare or domain-specific languages. A combined RAG and Few-Shot Learning (FSL) method [203] retrieves structurally similar examples from DSL repositories, enabling models to generate correct syntax and semantics with minimal supervision. This strategy improves performance in niche development settings where annotated examples are scarce. 

CodeT5+ [204], a flexible encoder–decoder architecture, further demonstrates the potential of retrieval-enhanced code models. Incorporating span denoising, contrastive learning, text–code matching, and causal language modeling, CodeT5+ achieves strong results across tasks such as code completion, defect detection, summarization, and multi-step reasoning. Its unified design exemplifies how retrieval-aware training can improve downstream generalization in diverse code domains. Table 5 summarizes representative retrieval-based code gen-eration systems; because it spans both commercial coding assistants and research systems, the “Attribute / Metric” column intentionally mixes two kinds of entries: product-level features (e.g., IDE support, pricing, training data source) for tools such as GitHub Copilot and CodeWhisperer, and quan-titative performance metrics (e.g., EM, BLEU, pass@k) for research systems such as ProCC and CodeT5+. Foundational tools such as GitHub Copilot and CodeWhisperer emphasize accessibility, IDE support, and broad language coverage, while newer systems such as ProCC and CodeT5+ deliver stronger exact-match and reasoning performance via task-aware re-trieval and training objectives. Retrieval-enhanced few-shot synthesis for uncommon DSLs also shows substantial error reduction with GPT-4 as shot count increases, underscoring its applicability in low-resource scenarios. The diversity of reported metrics-from BLEU and pass@k to clone detection F1-highlights the multifaceted evaluation landscape in code generation research. Future work in this area includes improving retrieval qual-ity for noisy or sparsely documented repositories, enabling on-the-fly index updates for fast-changing codebases, and ensur-ing privacy in proprietary developer environments. Additional goals involve bridging the performance gap between open-source and closed-source models, developing retrieval mecha-nisms that reason across multi-file and multi-library contexts, and unifying RAG with program verification frameworks to 21 

TABLE 5: Comparison of Retrieval-Based Code Generation Systems and Metrics                                                                        

> Model Category Attribute / Metric Score / Description
> GitHub Copilot IDE Support Supported IDEs IntelliJ, VSCode, PyCharm, etc. Reference / Explanation Provides References No Reference / Explanation Explains Suggestions No Suggestion Variety Options Returned Up to 10 Training Source Data Public Repositories Languages Supported Best With C, C++, Java, Python, etc. Accessibility Offline / Local Access No / Yes Release Info Developer / Release OpenAI–Microsoft / Oct 2021 Pricing Subscriptions Free for Students; $10–$19/month Amazon CodeWhisperer IDE Support Supported IDEs JetBrains, VS Code, AWS Cloud9 Reference / Explanation Provides References Yes Suggestion Variety Options Returned Up to 5 Accessibility Offline / Local Files No / Yes Release Info Developer / Release AWS / June 2022 ChatGPT [1] IDE Support Supported IDEs None Reference / Explanation Explains Suggestions Yes Suggestion Variety Options Returned One per request Training Source Data GitHub, GitLab, Codex Accessibility Offline / Local Files No / No Release Info Developer / Release OpenAI / Nov 2022 ProCC Accuracy EM (Open-Source / Private) 8.6% / 10.1% Fine-Tuning Gain Gain After FT 5.6% Model Performance CodeLlama EM / ES 54.66 / 75.85 Model Performance StarCoder EM / ES 49.14 / 72.69 RAG + Few-Shot for DSLs GPT-3.5 Error Rate 1–4 Shots 100%, 100%, 96%, 73% GPT-4 Error Rate 1–4 Shots 40%, 49%, 42%, 29% CodeT5+ Code Completion pass@1 / @10 / @100 35.0%, 54.5%, 77.9% Math QA (Python) pass@80 / @100 87.4%, 73.8% GSM8K (Python) pass@80 / @100 73.8%, 87.4% Summarization BLEU-4 33.83% Completion Exact Match 44.86% Retrieval MRR (Text-to-Code) 77.4 Defect Detection Accuracy 66.7% Clone Detection F1 Score 95.0%

enhance correctness and usability of generated code. 

4.3 Educational and Corporate Use Cases 

Applications. RAG-LLMs are increasingly adopted in edu-cational settings for personalized tutoring, automated feed-back, and intelligent content generation. By combining re-trieval with generative modeling, these systems can adapt to individual learning needs, fill contextual knowledge gaps, and ground explanations in curricular material. In automated tutoring, RAG has been used to assess social-emotional com-petencies in tutors, generate personalized feedback for pro-gramming learners, and support children with developmental disabilities. For example, PicotTo integrates offline LLMs with RAG-based retrieval to deliver tailored educational content to children with learning challenges [205]. Similarly, frameworks such as RAST enable automated question generation and exam preparation, producing diverse and targeted items that scale instructional support [206]. These systems collectively illustrate how RAG can enhance both formative and summa-tive assessment workflows. 

Benchmarks and Evaluation. Table 6 highlights the per-formance and cost characteristics of RAG-based educational systems. The LLaMA2 baseline achieves strong precision and accuracy on basic classification tasks, while RAG-enhanced GPT-4 setups for lecture feedback show rapid response times, grounded explanations via linked lecture segments, and posi-tive student satisfaction, trust, and usability scores. Cost com-parisons across prompting strategies indicate that RAG-based prompts can be significantly more economical than zero-shot or more elaborate reasoning prompts, particularly for large models such as GPT-4. Results from Xwin-LM-70B further suggest that high-capacity models can achieve near-perfect performance on targeted instructional tasks, reinforcing the viability of RAG-LLMs as scalable educational assistants. 

Applications. In corporate environments, RAG is increas-ingly used for intelligent knowledge management over hetero-geneous, domain-specific data. Recent work explores embed-ding fine-tuning, vector space segmentation, and LLM-based reranking to optimize retrieval from enterprise corpora and reduce hallucinations in high-stakes business queries [207]. 22 

TABLE 6: Evaluation of RAG-based and LLM-enhanced systems in educational and corporate contexts                                     

> Model Metric Details
> LLaMA2 Precision 89% Recall 84.5% Accuracy 85% RAG (Cost across prompting strategies) Zero-shot Prompt Type I(GPT-3.5 Turbo) $0.100 Zero-shot Prompt Type II (GPT-3.5 Turbo) $0.014 Tree of Thoughts Prompt (GPT-3.5 Turbo) $0.013 RAG Prompt (GPT-3.5 Turbo) $0.008 Zero-shot Prompt Type I(GPT-4 Turbo) $1.035 Zero-shot Prompt Type II (GPT-4 Turbo) $0.188 Tree of Thoughts Prompt (GPT-4 Turbo) $0.137 RAG Prompt (GPT-4 Turbo) $0.137 RAG with GPT-4 (Lecture Feedback System) Avg. Feedback Time (with lecture) 18 seconds Avg. Feedback Time (without lecture) 1–2 seconds Linked Lecture Segments 160 segments Avg. Segments per Feedback 1.67 Student Satisfaction (Length) Neutral to Agree Student Trust (Accuracy) Neutral to Agree System Usability Score 74.8 Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1-GPTQ Question-wise Accuracy Q1–Q6: 100%, Overall: 100%

These methods improve contextual accuracy in enterprise search, analytics, and decision-support workflows by ground-ing responses in internal documents rather than generic web data. Innovations such as element-based chunking for financial documents [208] and automated form-filling pipelines [209] demonstrate how RAG can process structured and semi-structured content, enabling downstream applications in le-gal, financial, and operational domains. 

Benchmarks and Evaluation. Table 7 illustrates the growing maturity of RAG systems for corporate knowledge management. The RAST framework demonstrates measur-able BLEU improvements across QA datasets, indicating the benefits of style-aware augmentation. The bge-large-en-v1.5 

model achieves consistently high NDCG and Accuracy@k scores across separate and combined vector spaces, underscor-ing the impact of embedding design in complex document corpora. DS-RAG emphasizes flexibility in multi-provider, policy-aware environments, where retrieval architecture must stay consistent even as infrastructure changes. The Chipper 

framework provides the most granular view of RAG behavior over financial reports [208], showing how different chunking strategies affect retrieval accuracy, ROUGE/BLEU scores, and Q&A performance relative to GPT-4 and human base-lines. These findings aim to bring to light the importance of hybrid chunking strategies, structured content modeling, and robust embedding spaces in enterprise-grade RAG deploy-ments. Ongoing research explores using LLMs as early-stage classifiers for query routing, refining data comparison tech-niques for chunk selection, and improving retrieval efficiency in time-sensitive decision pipelines. As organizations scale their digital infrastructure, RAG offers a principled frame-work for transforming enterprise search and knowledge access into an intelligent, context-aware service. 

## 5 Challenges and Open Problems in RAG-LLMs 

The remainder of the paper forms a single, consolidated dis-cussion, presented as four complementary lenses on the same material rather than as independent sections. This section catalogs the open challenges that limit current systems; §6 maps those challenges to concrete research directions ; §7 translates the resulting understanding into actionable guid-ance for practitioners; and §8 synthesizes the overall outlook. We retain these as separate labeled sections so that readers can navigate directly to challenges, directions, or guidance, but they are intended to be read together as the survey’s discussion of where the field stands and where it should go-each organized, like the taxonomy, around the four research questions RQ1-RQ4. The challenges facing modern RAG systems directly limit factual reliability, adaptability, and safe deployment across the four major axes of the field: efficiency-driven retrieval, defensive and safety-aware methods, user-centric personal-ization, and complex multi-step reasoning. These difficulties reveal structural gaps in how retrieval, generation, and reason-ing pipelines interact under real-world constraints. Mapped to the research questions introduced in §1: retrieval bottlenecks (§5.1) and scalability (§5.4) expose the limits of current answers to RQ1 ; hallucination and reliability issues (§5.2) and explainability gaps (§5.5) cut across RQ1 , RQ2 , and 

RQ4 ; domain adaptation and personalization failures (§5.3) directly challenge RQ3 ; and safety, privacy, and adversarial vulnerabilities span RQ2 throughout. Together, these chal-23 

TABLE 7: Metrics and Evaluation Results for RAG-based Corporate Knowledge Management Systems                            

> Model Metric Values and Evaluation Details
> RAST (Style Transfer) BLEU Scores (SQuAD/1) Top-1: 19.25, Oracle: 23.23, Pairwise: 48.91, Overall: 9.14 BLEU Scores (SQuAD/2) Top-1: 19.36, Oracle: 22.59, Pairwise: 56.42, Overall: 7.75 BLEU Scores (NewsQA) Top-1: 11.02, Oracle: 16.26, Pairwise: 23.16, Overall: 7.74 bge-large-en-v1.5 NDCG@10 0.85 Accuracy@k (Combined vs. Separate DBs) k=1: 0.85 / 0.91, k=5: 0.92 / 0.95, k=10: 0.93 / 0.97 Training/Test Split Written: 1450 / 500, Transcribed: 1450 / 500 Corpus Articles: 165 (2004 chunks), Transcribed Data: 59 (4167 chunks) DS-RAG Retrieval Latency Network-dependent Embedding Consistency Same across providers Ranking Time Tech-dependent Similarity Accuracy High (model-dependent) Chipper (Financial Reports) Element Distribution NarrativeText: 61,780; Title: 29,664; Tables: 7,700; etc. Chunking Stats Base128: 64k chunks (Mean 800), Base256: 32k, Base512: 16k, Chipper: 20.8k Retrieval Accuracy (Page Level) Base128: 72.34%, Base256: 73.05%, Base512: 68.09%, Aggregated: 83.69% Retrieval ROUGE/BLEU Base128: 0.383 / 0.181, Base256: 0.433 / 0.231, Base512: 0.455 / 0.250 Chipper Aggregated Scores ROUGE: 0.568, BLEU: 0.452, Accuracy: 84.40% Keywords Chipper Scores ROUGE: 0.444, BLEU: 0.315, Accuracy: 46.10% Summary Chipper Scores ROUGE: 0.473, BLEU: 0.350, Accuracy: 62.41% Prefix+Table Chipper Scores ROUGE: 0.514, BLEU: 0.400, Accuracy: 67.38% Q&A Results (Base128) No answer: 35.46%, GPT-4: 29.08%, Manual: 35.46% Q&A Results (Base256) No answer: 25.53%, GPT-4: 32.62%, Manual: 36.88% Q&A Results (Base512) No answer: 24.82%, GPT-4: 41.84%, Manual: 48.23% Q&A Results (Keywords) No answer: 22.70%, GPT-4: 43.97%, Manual: 53.19% Q&A Results (Summary) No answer: 17.73%, GPT-4: 43.97%, Manual: 51.77% Q&A Results (Prefix+Table) No answer: 20.57%, GPT-4: 41.13%, Manual: 53.19%

lenges highlight the need for more unified retrieval–generation objectives, robust uncertainty modeling, adaptive user- and domain-aware retrieval strategies, and stronger safeguards to ensure that next-generation RAG systems remain reliable, interpretable, and resilient. 

5.1 Retrieval Bottlenecks 

One of the most pressing limitations in RAG systems lies in the retrieval pipeline, particularly when operating over large-scale or heterogeneous knowledge bases. The recurring failure modes are:  

> •

As dataset sizes grow, retrieval efficiency becomes a major bottleneck, often resulting in increased latency, reduced relevance of retrieved results, and diminished system scalability-especially in enterprise and real-time applications where timely and accurate responses are critical [210, 83, 211].  

> •

Traditional retrieval methods, such as dense or sparse vector search, can degrade in performance under high retrieval loads or when faced with domain shifts, forcing practitioners into difficult trade-offs between retrieval accuracy and computational efficiency [212, 213]; more sophisticated retrievers typically yield higher precision but incur greater inference costs, which can be prohibitive at scale.  

> •

Optimizing the size and granularity of text chunks re-mains a difficult balancing act: large chunks may provide richer context but introduce semantic noise and redun-dancy, while small chunks can fragment information and reduce effective relevance [214, 215]; these issues are com-pounded in heterogeneous and dynamic corpora, where documents vary widely in structure and length.  

> •

Retrieval bottlenecks are further exacerbated by the limitations of static indexing in evolving knowledge en-vironments: indices are often expensive to rebuild, and many systems lack efficient mechanisms to update or re-rank indices without extensive reprocessing [83, 216], and current work still lacks adaptive, self-updating retrieval mechanisms that preserve relevance and efficiency as corpora change over time.  

> •

In deployment, this leads to outdated retrieval outputs, higher latency, and reduced reliability-problems that be-come especially severe in enterprise, time-sensitive, and mission-critical applications. 

5.2 Hallucination and Reliability Issues 

Although RAG frameworks significantly reduce hallucinations in large language models by grounding responses in retrieved evidence, reliability remains a persistent concern:  

> •

Hallucinations still occur when the retrieved content is irrelevant, outdated, or misleading; because generation is conditioned on this context, inaccuracies in retrieval propagate into the final response and can create a false sense of factuality [217, 211, 218].  

> •

Even with rich external sources, incomplete or noisy knowledge bases can lead to erroneous answers, partic-ularly in open-domain settings; LLMs also struggle to interpret subtle nuances or contradictions in retrieved text, sometimes producing overly confident responses that misrepresent the evidence [219, 216].  

> •

Integrating retrieved content fluently and coherently into generated outputs is itself a challenge: misalignment be-tween retrieved evidence and the model’s internal priors can yield unnatural phrasing, semantic inconsistencies, or selective use of evidence that omits key qualifiers [220].  

> •

In cases where user queries extend beyond the scope or coverage of the knowledge base, RAG systems may even underperform relative to purely parametric LLMs, be-cause their dependency on external content can constrain generative flexibility [221]. 24 

TABLE 8: Evaluation of RAG Models for Scientific and Legal Text Processing                                     

> Model Setting / Task Precision / Recall / F1 Other Metrics /Notes
> CaseGPT Medical, Legal Domain QA
> Medical: Precision@10: 0.90, F1: 0.89
> Legal: Precision@10: 0.93, F1: 0.91 MRR: 0.92 (med), 0.94 (legal) NDCG@10: 0.91/0.93 Human Scores: Quality: 4.3, Relevance: 4.5 CBR-RAG Case Law Legal QA –Top Statutes: Fed. Court Rules (9), Civil Aviation (8), etc. Improves grounding using legal precedent LegalBench-RAG Benchmark Evaluation –Q&A Counts: CUAD (4042), MAUD (1676), etc. Total Q&A: 6858 HyPA-RAG Hybrid Retrieval +Adaptation Context Recall: 0.9046 Faithfulness: 0.8430 F1 Similarity: 0.8621 Correctness (1-5): 4.25 PA-Class (2/3): 0.90/0.89 Answer Relevancy: 0.79 / 0.77
> •

Ongoing work explores dynamic context filtering, entailment-aware generation, hallucination detection mechanisms, and training objectives that better align factual grounding with semantic fluency [222, 223], but a major open problem is the absence of unified, fine-grained frameworks that jointly model retrieval quality, hallucination detection, and generation-time factual ver-ification; most systems still treat retrieval and generation as loosely coupled components, limiting their ability to assess evidence reliability or correct misleading context during inference. 

5.3 Domain Adaptation and Personalization 

Adapting RAG systems to specialized domains such as sci-entific research, finance, or medicine introduces unique chal-lenges for both retrieval and generation, and personalization adds a further layer of complexity:  

> •

Distribution shifts between general-purpose LLMs and domain-specific language often lead to failures in extract-ing relevant information or correctly interpreting spe-cialized terminology, which in turn degrades factuality, coherence, and task relevance [224, 225].  

> •

One promising direction involves self-training approaches that jointly develop question answering and genera-tion capabilities tailored to a target domain: by fine-tuning LLMs on instruction-following, search-centric, and domain-specific QA tasks-and then prompting them to generate domain-relevant queries over unlabeled corpora-researchers have shown that iterative feedback loops can improve performance without exhaustive man-ual annotation [226].  

> •

Complementary frameworks such as RAG-end2end 

jointly train the retriever and generator on domain-specific datasets, allowing all components, including the knowledge index, to adapt in unison to specialized re-trieval demands [227].  

> •

Tailoring RAG systems to individual users or enterprise use cases requires fine-grained control over retrieval con-tent, indexing granularity, and context-aware prompt-ing, often under strict security and compliance con-straints; in enterprise deployments, systems must support safe access to proprietary information, raising concerns about data leakage from stored embeddings or vector databases [228, 229].  

> •

To mitigate these risks, researchers advocate security-first RAG designs that incorporate access-controlled re-trieval, embedding encryption, and AI-driven data clas-sification at ingestion time [230, 231], and advanced implementations support multi-dimensional access con-trol based on user roles, data sensitivity, and contextual business relevance [232].  

> •

Despite progress, current work still lacks unified frame-works that can simultaneously adapt retrieval, genera-tion, indexing, and personalization signals across het-erogeneous domains and user profiles, leading to brittle performance under domain shift, inconsistent personal-ization quality, and heightened privacy or compliance risks. 

5.4 Scalability and Latency Constraints 

Scalability and latency present persistent bottlenecks in real-time RAG systems:  

> •

As underlying knowledge bases expand, the compu-tational overhead required to retrieve and rank rele-vant content increases, and even modest delays can disrupt user experience or degrade decision quality in settings such as customer support [233], healthcare, or autonomous systems [234].  

> •

Recent efforts explore distributed and federated retrieval as practical strategies for handling large-scale data en-vironments: distributed retrieval architectures shard the 25 

corpus across multiple nodes, enabling parallel search and improved scalability, while federated retrieval ex-tends this paradigm by querying decentralized and het-erogeneous data sources without centralizing storage-a crucial capability in enterprises with siloed knowledge assets [235].  

> •

These architectures, however, introduce new engineer-ing challenges: ensuring consistency across distributed caches, managing load balancing, and maintaining syn-chronized updates are all non-trivial, especially when corpora change frequently [236].  

> •

Integrating generation into a distributed RAG setting often requires asynchronous processing and sophisticated caching strategies to avoid new bottlenecks in the infor-mation flow; to reduce retrieval latency without sacrific-ing accuracy, researchers employ advanced indexing tech-niques, Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search, pre-fetching, and contextual pre-filtering to narrow can-didate sets before full scoring [237].  

> •

Yet a key gap remains: there are few end-to-end scalable RAG architectures that jointly optimize retrieval, index-ing, and generation under real-world latency budgets. In practice, treating retrieval as the sole bottleneck can lead to unpredictable response times and degraded reliability once downstream synchronization and coordination costs are taken into account. 

5.5 Explainability and Interpretability 

One of the core promises of RAG systems is improved trans-parency over traditional black-box LLMs, owing to their ability to explicitly reference external sources:  

> •

By anchoring responses in retrieved content, RAG sys-tems allow users to trace the origins of generated outputs, verify supporting documents, and understand how infor-mation was synthesized [238, 83]. This provenance-aware generation is particularly valuable in regulated domains such as healthcare, finance, and law, where justification and auditability are essential [27, 224, 83], making RAG a natural candidate for applications that require both high performance and clear evidence trails.  

> •

Evaluation metrics for RAG explainability have evolved beyond traditional retrieval benchmarks to include con-textual precision and contextual recall, which assess not only relevance but also the semantic fit of retrieved context within the generation pipeline [102, 239].  

> •

Standard tools such as Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) and Mean Average Precision (MAP) remain important for retrieval diagnostics, while newer frameworks like FRAMES [21] and Face4RAG [199] introduce hallucina-tion detection and logical consistency scoring for end-to-end system integrity.  

> •

To further improve interpretability, researchers have pro-posed visualizing attention flows between retrieved doc-uments and generated tokens, enabling more intuitive debugging and model introspection [102]; some systems also integrate rule-based reasoning or knowledge graph overlays to constrain generation within domain-specific bounds, reducing error propagation and supporting semi-symbolic inference [240].  

> •

Despite these advances, RAG systems remain susceptible to opaque behaviors when retrieval fails, when LLMs override retrieved facts, or when evidence is selectively used; ongoing work therefore investigates integrating ex-plainability into training objectives, employing counter-factual prompting, and designing interactive user inter-faces that expose the decision path taken by RAG models in real time [224, 239].  

> •

A significant open problem is the absence of standard-ized, fine-grained frameworks that unify retrieval trans-parency, reasoning traceability, and generation-level at-tribution into a single interpretable pipeline. In deploy-ment, this fragmentation hinders trust, auditability, and error analysis-especially in regulated or high-stakes envi-ronments where stakeholders must understand not only what the model retrieved, but how that evidence shaped its final reasoning process. 

## 6 Future Directions 

As RAG systems gain traction across academic, industrial, and applied domains, several promising directions are emerg-ing to address current limitations and expand the utility of RAG-enhanced language models. This section outlines four research frontiers that can shape the next generation of RAG architectures and connect the axes in our taxonomy-efficiency, defense, interactivity, and complex reasoning-to longer-term system design. 

6.1 RAG with Reinforcement Learning 

Addresses: RQ1 (accuracy–cost trade-off under constrained inference) and RQ4 (preventing error accumulation in multi-step pipelines). Current systems answer RQ1 and RQ4 only partially: retrieval policies are largely static and local, not jointly optimized with generation objectives or multi-step task rewards. A growing direction is the integration of reinforcement learning (RL) into RAG pipelines to jointly optimize retrieval and generation decisions. Most current systems treat retrieval as a static, pre-tuned process that is only weakly aligned with downstream objectives. RL instead provides a principled framework to learn retrieval and generation policies from reward signals tied to task performance, factual accuracy, user satisfaction, or safety. Early demonstrations of this approach-such as the RLHF-based generation loop in FoRAG [191] and the trust-driven retrieval policy in TrustRAG [39]-show that aligning retrieval with reward signals substantially reduces hallucinations and improves factual grounding over static retrieval baselines. In RL-based RAG, retrieval policies can be trained to select documents based on expected downstream utility, to re-rank candidates using feedback from the generator, or to decide adaptively when retrieval is needed at all. Techniques such as reward shaping, inverse RL, and curriculum learning could guide both retriever and generator toward globally beneficial behaviors in multi-step or multi-hop tasks, rather than optimizing only local relevance scores. Combining RL with offline data such as logged user inter-actions, historical retrieval traces, or prior evaluation signals may enable fine-tuning without extensive new annotation. As real-world deployments increasingly demand adaptive rea-soning and low hallucination rates, RL-based RAG frame-works are likely to become an important tool for aligning 26 

retrieval strategies, generation style, and safety constraints with application-level goals. In terms of the formal framework, RL replaces the static retrieval distribution pθ (di | q) in Eq. (7) and the fixed selection policies of Algorithms 2-5 with reward-driven policies, and recasts the per-step term of the reasoning objective (Eq. (10)) as a return to be maximized rather than a divergence to be minimized; the state-update step of Algorithm 5 becomes the natural locus for a learned value or reward model. 

6.2 Neuro-Symbolic Integration in RAG 

Addresses: RQ4 (multi-hop reasoning and error accumula-tion) and RQ2 (verifiable, constraint-satisfying retrieval in high-stakes domains). Current graph-based systems advance RQ4 but structured symbolic verification integrated end-to-end with retrieval and generation remains largely unsolved. While current RAG models rely primarily on dense or sparse vector retrieval, they often lack the structured reason-ing capabilities required for complex decision-making. Neuro-symbolic approaches-where neural models are augmented with symbolic inference engines, rule-based logic, or knowl-edge graphs-offer a path toward stronger factual grounding, constraint satisfaction, and interpretability. Current work has begun exploring this direction through graph-augmented re-trieval systems such as GraphRAG [27], G-Retriever [71], and GRAG [155], as well as knowledge-graph-grounded dialogue systems [154] that use structured KG traversal to constrain and verify generation. Integrating symbolic modules into RAG could enable sys-tems to perform consistency checks, apply domain rules, and conduct multi-hop reasoning over structured representations. Ontology-guided retrieval, schema-aware indexing, or logical filtering can help align generation with legal, scientific, or safety constraints, especially in domains such as compliance, scientific discovery, or software engineering. Symbolic memory components may also support long-horizon reasoning by stor-ing and manipulating intermediate knowledge states across turns. Hybrid neuro-symbolic RAG architectures have the po-tential to produce more explainable responses by pairing free-form language with structured justifications, citations, or rule traces. Progress in graph retrieval, semantic parsing, differ-entiable reasoning, and rule-aware generation will be essen-tial for scaling these capabilities to high-stakes settings that demand verifiable outputs and clear guarantees. Concretely, symbolic components would be injected into the coherence and consistency functions C(rt, h t) and J (ht, h t−1) of the reasoning objective (Eq. (10))-replacing soft differentiable penalties with rule- or ontology-based checks-and into the document-selection steps of Algorithms 2-4, where a logical-constraint filter would gate documents before generation; in the defensive objective (Eq. (8)) the same machinery could supply a verifiable surrogate for the toxicity, privacy, and bias scores T , P, B.

6.3 Expanding Beyond Text: Multi-Modal and Structured Retrieval 

Addresses: RQ1 (retrieval precision across heterogeneous cor-pora), RQ3 (adapting to richer, multi-modal user contexts), and RQ4 (reasoning over evidence that spans text, images, tables, and code). Early demonstrations exist, but unified cross-modal retrieval with coherent reasoning remains an open challenge across all four RQs. As LLMs are increasingly deployed in multi-modal envi-ronments, extending RAG systems beyond plain text has be-come a key challenge. Many real-world tasks require retrieving and reasoning over images, tables, code, videos, audio, and other structured artefacts. Traditional RAG pipelines, which assume unstructured text corpora, struggle to capture the full spectrum of such information. Early explorations of this direction include modular vision–language architectures such as mPLUG-Owl [142] and MiniGPT-4 [141], video retrieval systems [147, 35], and systematic surveys of vision-based RAG [58] that characterize the technical challenges unique to cross-modal grounding. Future RAG architectures will need to learn unified or well-aligned embedding spaces that support cross-modal re-trieval, cross-attention between textual queries and non-textual evidence, and dynamic decisions about which modal-ity is most informative for a given query. Structured retrieval over knowledge graphs, relational databases, or APIs raises additional issues in indexing, segmentation, query translation, and semantic matching. Applications in healthcare (e.g., combining imaging re-ports, structured lab values, and clinical notes), education (e.g., grounding answers in lecture videos and slides), and scientific discovery (e.g., retrieving tables, figures, and code from research papers) can particularly benefit from multi-modal RAG. As modalities converge, expanding RAG beyond text will be critical for building more comprehensive knowl-edge agents that operate over the full range of digital artifacts encountered in practice. Formally, this requires generalizing the encoders ϕq and ϕd and the similarity score of Eq. (5) to a shared multi-modal embedding space, and broadening the retriever R(x, C) of Algorithm 1 so that the corpus C spans images, tables, and code rather than text alone. 

6.4 Improved Evaluation Benchmarks 

Addresses: All four RQs. Progress on RQ1–RQ4 cannot be reliably measured without benchmarks that jointly assess efficiency, robustness, personalization quality, and multi-hop reasoning fidelity; current frameworks cover each dimension incompletely and rarely in combination. Despite progress in separately benchmarking retrieval and generation, comprehensive evaluation of end-to-end RAG sys-tems remains underdeveloped. Existing metrics often miss key dimensions such as attribution quality, hallucination rates, contextual relevance, robustness to noisy retrieval, and long-term reasoning consistency. As RAG becomes integral to high-stakes workflows, standardized and interpretable evaluation tools will be essential. General-purpose frameworks such as RAGAS [96], RAGBench [97], and BERGEN [120] have begun providing modular, reproducible infrastructure for end-to-end evaluation, while task-specific benchmarks like FRAMES [21] and Face4RAG [199] introduce multi-dimensional scoring for reasoning fidelity and hallucination detection. More work is needed to assess RAG in multilingual, multi-modal, multi-hop, and user-centric settings. Bench-marks should account not only for answer accuracy, but also for grounding fidelity, the quality of evidence selection, and 27 

user-centric factors such as trust, readability, and stability over time. Dataset diversity is another bottleneck, with most evaluations concentrated on English and general-purpose QA. Future research should prioritize task-specific benchmarks in domains like law, medicine, education, and programming, along with protocols that explicitly test safety and fairness. Explainability-aware evaluation measuring how clearly mod-els link outputs to retrieved inputs and how reliably they expose their evidence chains will be crucial for building RAG systems that are not only effective, but also auditable and trustworthy in real-world use. Whether a single uniform benchmark can span all four axes remains an open question. We argue that it is only partially feasible: efficiency, robustness, personalization, and reasoning fidelity rest on fundamentally different ground truths-latency and token budgets, adversarial robustness, user satisfaction, and multi-hop correctness-that cannot be collapsed into a single score. A more realistic target is a shared evaluation harness with axis-specific tracks-common corpora, retrieval interfaces, and reporting formats, but per-axis metrics-rather than one universal leaderboard. In terms of the formal framework, such a harness would need to in-strument the scoring functions that the four objectives leave abstract: the utility U(q, d ) and cost Cϕ(d) of Eq. (7), the risk terms T , P, B of Eq. (8), the user-alignment terms H, F 

of Eq. (9), and the step-wise coherence and consistency of Eq. (10), so that methods become directly comparable along common dimensions. 

## 7 Actionable Guidance for Practitioners 

Practitioners designing real-world RAG systems must bal-ance retrieval architecture, efficiency, safety, and evaluation rigor. These recommendations map directly onto the sur-vey’s research questions: retrieval-architecture and efficiency choices operationalize RQ1 , safety and privacy controls ad-dress RQ2 , user-centric alignment metrics speak to RQ3 , and multi-hop evaluation targets RQ4 . Sparse retrieval methods such as BM25 offer interpretability, strong performance on long or keyword-rich documents, and low operational cost, while dense retrievers excel at semantic matching for short or concept-heavy queries, making them well suited for multi-hop reasoning or personalized interactions. In many settings, hybrid sparse–dense configurations provide the best balance between recall and precision, especially when dense retrieval rescues semantic matches that sparse methods miss and sparse retrieval filters obviously irrelevant content. Efficient RAG pipelines benefit from modularity, early filtering, and adaptive retrieval. Lightweight query encoding, hybrid retrieval, reranking layers, context compression, and dynamic (rather than fixed top-k) retrieval loops can all help reduce latency and improve grounding quality. Practical deployments should combine these techniques with caching strategies and domain-aware chunking (e.g., element-based chunking for financial or legal documents) to avoid redun-dant work and improve retrieval granularity. Enterprise use cases introduce additional constraints. Systems must support auditability of retrieval corpora, fine-grained access control at retrieval time, and integration with structured data sources such as databases, APIs, and knowledge graphs. Continuous monitoring for hallucinations, retrieval drift, knowledge stale-ness, and policy violations is essential when RAG is embedded in business-critical workflows. A robust evaluation workflow should measure retrieval precision and recall, grounding fi-delity, hallucination rates, latency, robustness to noisy or shifted domains, multi-hop reasoning quality, and the relative contributions of retrieval and generation, complemented by user-centric alignment metrics such as satisfaction, trust, and perceived helpfulness. Safety and privacy guidelines parallel Defensive RAG principles. Systems should filter or rerank retrieved content to exclude toxic, biased, or privacy-sensitive documents; enforce strict role-based visibility for enterprise knowledge; and preferentially use synthetic or redacted cor-pora in high-risk domains. Regular audits, bias assessments, and adversarial stress tests help ensure that retrieval and generation behave safely under realistic and worst-case con-ditions. In combination, these practices provide a practical recipe for deploying RAG systems that are not only powerful and efficient, but also secure, compliant, and aligned with user and organizational goals. 

## 8 Conclusion 

RAG has become a central paradigm for extending LLMs be-yond static, parametric knowledge. By coupling large models with external retrieval, RAG addresses persistent issues such as outdated information, hallucinations, and weak factual grounding. This survey has traced the evolution of RAG systems across architectures, training strategies, and appli-cation domains, and has organized recent work along four complementary axes: compression and efficiency , defensive and safety-aware RAG , interactive and user-centric systems ,and complex reasoning and multi-step pipelines . These axes correspond directly to the four research questions posed in §1-efficiency ( RQ1 ), defense ( RQ2 ), interactivity ( RQ3 ), and reasoning ( RQ4 )-so the survey’s contribution is best read as a map of how far the literature has answered each. Viewed together, these axes highlight how the field has moved from simple retrieve-then-generate pipelines toward more adaptive, risk-aware, and cognitively structured retrieval–generation loops. Across applications, we observe RAG being deployed in open-domain QA, conversational agents, code generation, educational and corporate assistants, and scientific and legal workflows. These settings share a common requirement: sys-tems must combine fluent generation with reliable access to verifiable, task-specific knowledge. RAG meets this require-ment by making retrieval a first-class component of system design, but the diversity of deployment scenarios also exposes recurring pain points around evaluation, domain transfer, and operational robustness. The preceding sections have outlined key challenges in-cluding retrieval bottlenecks, residual hallucinations, domain and user adaptation, scalability and latency constraints, and limited end-to-end explainability, as well as near-term re-search directions in reinforcement learning for RAG (§6.1), neuro-symbolic and knowledge-graph integration (§6.2), mul-timodal and structured retrieval (§6.3), and improved bench-marks (§6.4). Looking ahead, the impact of RAG will depend not only on architectural innovations but also on how seam-lessly these systems integrate with real-world infrastructure, satisfy privacy and fairness requirements, and remain main-tainable as underlying corpora and user needs evolve. We hope 28 

this survey provides a clear map of the design space and a practical foundation for researchers and practitioners building the next generation of retrieval-augmented systems. Beyond the near-term directions detailed in §6, two further trajectories are likely to shape the longer-term evolution of RAG. 

Agentic RAG. RAG pipelines are likely to evolve from single-shot retrieval modules into agents that actively manage their own information needs. Rather than issuing a single query and generating an answer, future systems will itera-tively reformulate queries, plan multi-step retrieval strategies, test competing hypotheses, and call external tools when re-trieval alone is insufficient. Retrieval will become a decision taken at many points along the reasoning process (“Do I need more evidence here? What kind? From where?”), rather than a fixed preprocessing step. This shift toward agentic RAG will blur the line between retrieval, planning, and reasoning, with policies that explicitly trade off additional retrieval against latency, cost, and expected accuracy. 

LLM-as-Retriever and Unified Agent Architectures. 

As LLMs themselves improve at recall, reasoning, and tool orchestration, we are likely to see architectures where the same model acts as both generator and high-level retriever. Instead of relying solely on external vector stores, future systems may query latent memory buffers, learned key–value stores, or lightweight external tools under the control of a single agentic policy. In such setups, classical vector search will remain important, but it will be wrapped inside broader agent frameworks that decide when to consult external indices, when to rely on internal representations, and how to coor-dinate multiple tools (search, databases, simulators) within one coherent control loop. 

Scaling Laws for Retrieval. Just as scaling laws have helped characterize how model size and data volume affect LLM performance, we expect analogous principles to emerge for retrieval. Early evidence suggests systematic relationships between corpus size, chunking strategy, retriever capacity, context window, and downstream accuracy or hallucination rates. Formalizing these “retrieval scaling laws” would give practitioners concrete guidance on questions such as: How should index size grow with model size? When does more context stop helping? How aggressively can we compress or filter documents before accuracy degrades? Such insights would make RAG design less heuristic and more principled, helping teams provision retrieval resources that match their models and tasks. Overall, we anticipate that RAG will continue to evolve from a simple augmentation technique into a core organizing principle for knowledge-intensive AI systems. Systems that can proactively seek information, reason over structured and multi-modal evidence, and expose clear links between re-trieved sources and generated outputs will be best positioned to meet real-world demands for accuracy, transparency, and adaptability. 

## Author Contributions 

Meghana Sunil and Shravya V contributed equally to this work and jointly led the development of the review, including conceptualization, literature survey, and analysis. Shravan Venkatraman supported the work by assisting with writing, manuscript refinement, and providing technical feedback. Joe Dhanith P R contributed through writing support, supervi-sion, and overall mentorship that guided the direction and quality of the work. 

## Conflict of Interests: 

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest associated with this work. 

## Funding Information: 

This research did not receive any financial support or fund-ing. 

## References                         

> [1] OpenAI, J. Achiam, and S. Adler, “Gpt-4 technical report,” 2024. 1, 20, 21 [2] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, and J.-B. Alayrac, “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models,” 2025. 1 [3] R. Anil, A. M. Dai, O. Firat, M. Johnson, D. Lepikhin, A. Pas-sos, S. Shakeri, E. Taropa, P. Bailey, Z. Chen, E. Chu, J. H. Clark, L. E. Shafey, Y. Huang, K. Meier-Hellstern, G. Mishra, E. Moreira, M. Omernick, K. Robinson, S. Ruder, Y. Tay, K. Xiao, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, G. H. Abrego, J. Ahn, J. Austin, P. Barham, J. Botha, J. Bradbury, S. Brahma, K. Brooks, M. Catasta, Y. Cheng, C. Cherry, C. A. Choquette-Choo, A. Chowdhery, C. Crepy, S. Dave, M. Dehghani, S. Dev, J. De-vlin, M. Díaz, N. Du, E. Dyer, V. Feinberg, F. Feng, V. Fienber, M. Freitag, X. Garcia, S. Gehrmann, L. Gonzalez, G. Gur-Ari, S. Hand, H. Hashemi, L. Hou, J. Howland, A. Hu, J. Hui, J. Hurwitz, M. Isard, A. Ittycheriah, M. Jagielski, W. Jia, K. Kenealy, M. Krikun, S. Kudugunta, C. Lan, K. Lee, B. Lee, E. Li, M. Li, W. Li, Y. Li, J. Li, H. Lim, H. Lin, Z. Liu, F. Liu, M. Maggioni, A. Mahendru, J. Maynez, V. Misra, M. Moussalem, Z. Nado, J. Nham, E. Ni, A. Nystrom, A. Par-rish, M. Pellat, M. Polacek, A. Polozov, R. Pope, S. Qiao, E. Reif, B. Richter, P. Riley, A. C. Ros, A. Roy, B. Saeta, R. Samuel, R. Shelby, A. Slone, D. Smilkov, D. R. So, D. Sohn, S. Tokumine, D. Valter, V. Vasudevan, K. Vodrahalli, X. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Wang, J. Wieting, Y. Wu, K. Xu, Y. Xu, L. Xue, P. Yin, J. Yu, Q. Zhang, S. Zheng, C. Zheng, W. Zhou, D. Zhou, S. Petrov, and Y. Wu, “Palm 2 technical report,” 2023. 1[4] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao, V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini, R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas, V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lavril, J. Lee, D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov, P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Saladi, A. Schelten, R. Silva, E. M. Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov, Y. Zhang, A. Fan, M. Kam-badur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, and T. Scialom, “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” 2023. 1 [5] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Ro-driguez, A. Joulin, E. Grave, and G. Lample, “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” 2023. 1 [6] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann, P. Schuh, K. Shi, S. Tsvyashchenko, J. Maynez, A. Rao, P. Barnes, Y. Tay, N. Shazeer, V. Prabhakaran, E. Reif, N. Du, B. Hutchinson, R. Pope, J. Bradbury, J. Austin, M. Isard, G. Gur-Ari, P. Yin, T. Duke, A. Levskaya, S. Ghemawat, S. Dev, H. Michalewski, X. Garcia, V. Misra, K. Robinson, L. Fedus, D. Zhou, D. Ippolito, D. Luan, H. Lim, B. Zoph, A. Spiridonov, R. Sepassi, D. Dohan, S. Agrawal, M. Omernick, A. M. Dai, T. S. Pillai, M. Pellat, A. Lewkowycz, E. Moreira, R. Child, O. Polozov, K. Lee, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, B. Saeta, 29

M. Diaz, O. Firat, M. Catasta, J. Wei, K. Meier-Hellstern, D. Eck, J. Dean, S. Petrov, and N. Fiedel, “Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,” 2022. 1 [7] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Ka-plan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sas-try, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Win-ter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, eds.), vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 1 [8] O. Thawakar, D. Dissanayake, K. P. More, R. Thawkar, A. Heakl, N. Ahsan, Y. Li, I. Z. M. Zumri, J. Lahoud, R. M. Anwer, et al. , “Llamav-o1: Rethinking step-by-step visual rea-soning in llms,” in Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 24290–24315, 2025. 1 [9] S. Li, L. Stenzel, C. Eickhoff, and S. A. Bahrainian, “Enhancing retrieval-augmented generation: a study of best practices,” in 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics , pp. 6705–6717, 2025. 1 [10] S. Wu, X. Ma, D. Luo, L. Li, X. Shi, X. Chang, X. Lin, R. Luo, C. Pei, C. Du, et al. , “Automated literature research and review-generation method based on large language models,” 

National Science Review , vol. 12, no. 6, p. nwaf169, 2025. 1 [11] M. D’Arcy, T. Hope, L. Birnbaum, and D. Downey, “Marg: Multi-agent review generation for scientific papers,” 2024. 1 [12] Z. Gao, K. Brantley, and T. Joachims, “Reviewer2: Optimizing review generation through prompt generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10886 , 2024. 1 [13] W. Jiang, J. Chen, X. Ding, J. Wu, J. He, and G. Wang, “Review summary generation in online systems: Frameworks for supervised and unsupervised scenarios,” ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB) , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021. 1 [14] Z. Yi, J. Ouyang, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, T. Liao, H. Luo, and Y. Shen, “A survey on recent advances in llm-based multi-turn dialogue systems,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1–38, 2025. 1 [15] Y. Fan and X. Luo, “A survey of dialogue system evaluation,” in 2020 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI) , pp. 1202–1209, IEEE, 2020. 1 [16] S. E. Finch and J. D. Choi, “Towards unified dialogue system evaluation: A comprehensive analysis of current evaluation protocols,” in Proceedings of the 21th annual meeting of the special interest group on discourse and dialogue , pp. 236–245, 2020. 1 [17] J. Ni, T. Young, V. Pandelea, F. Xue, and E. Cambria, “Recent advances in deep learning based dialogue systems: A systematic survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04387 , 2021. 1 [18] M. Keymanesh, A. Benton, and M. Dredze, “What makes data-to-text generation hard for pretrained language models?,” in 

Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on natural language genera-tion, evaluation, and metrics (GEM) , pp. 539–554, 2022. 1 [19] Y. Lin, T. Ruan, J. Liu, and H. Wang, “A survey on neural data-to-text generation,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1431–1449, 2023. 1 [20] M. Sharma, A. K. Gogineni, and N. Ramakrishnan, “Neural methods for data-to-text generation,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1–46, 2024. 1 [21] S. Krishna, K. Krishna, A. Mohananey, S. Schwarcz, A. Stam-bler, S. Upadhyay, and M. Faruqui, “Fact, fetch, and reason: A unified evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation,” in 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Amer-icas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pp. 4745–4759, 2025. 1, 18, 19, 25, 26 [22] Y. Ke, L. Jin, K. Elangovan, H. R. Abdullah, N. Liu, A. T. H. Sia, C. R. Soh, J. Y. M. Tung, J. C. L. Ong, and D. S. W. Ting, “Development and testing of retrieval augmented generation in large language models–a case study report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01733 , 2024. 1 [23] G. Chen, W. Yu, X. Lu, X. Zhang, E. Meng, and L. Sha, “Unlocking multi-view insights in knowledge-dense retrieval-augmented generation,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing , 2025. 1 [24] X. Wang, P. Sen, R. Li, and E. Yilmaz, “Adaptive retrieval-augmented generation for conversational systems,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 

(L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, eds.), (Albuquerque, New Mexico), pp. 491–503, Association for Computational Linguis-tics, Apr. 2025. 1 [25] Y. Wang, P. Li, M. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Self-knowledge guided re-trieval augmentation for large language models,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 ,pp. 10303–10315, 2023. 1 [26] A. Singh, A. Ehtesham, S. Kumar, T. T. Khoei, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Agentic retrieval-augmented generation: A survey on agentic rag,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09136 , 2025. 1, 5, 6 [27] H. Han, Y. Wang, H. Shomer, K. Guo, J. Ding, Y. Lei, M. Halappanavar, R. A. Rossi, S. Mukherjee, X. Tang, et al. ,“Retrieval-augmented generation with graphs (graphrag),” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00309 , 2024. 1, 25, 26 [28] X. Li, P. Jia, D. Xu, Y. Wen, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Wang, 

et al. , “A survey of personalization: From RAG to agent,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1–39, 2026. 1 [29] L. Chen, X. Wei, J. Li, X. Dong, P. Zhang, Y. Zang, Z. Chen, H. Duan, B. Lin, Z. Tang, L. Yuan, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, F. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Sharegpt4video: Improving video understanding and generation with better captions,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, eds.), vol. 37, pp. 19472–19495, Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 1[30] Y. Feng, H. A. Rahmani, A. Lipani, and E. Yilmaz, “Towards asking clarification questions for information seeking on task-oriented dialogues,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13690 , 2023. 1 [31] S. Venkatraman, J. D. PR, and M. S. Kavitha, “Hierarchical graph-guided contextual representation learning for neurode-generative pattern recognition in mri,” Computers in Biology and Medicine , vol. 199, p. 111276, 2025. 1 [32] S. Venkatraman, M. S. Kavitha, V. Manikandarajan, J. Wu, 

et al. , “Can we go beyond visual features? neural tissue rela-tion modeling for relational graph analysis in non-melanoma skin histology,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 6427–6437, 2026. 1 [33] S. Venkatraman, R. R. Madavan, et al. , “Ugpl: Uncertainty-guided progressive learning for evidence-based classification in computed tomography,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 958–968, 2025. 1 [34] S. Kanthimathi, P. Nanda, S. Venkatraman, V. Renganayagan, and S. Eswaran, “Transforming education through ai-powered personalized assessment models,” in Adopting Artificial Intel-ligence Tools in Higher Education , pp. 136–154, CRC Press, 2025. 1 [35] S. Jeong, K. Kim, J. Baek, and S. J. Hwang, “Videorag: Retrieval-augmented generation over video corpus,” in Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 21278–21298, 2025. 1, 26 [36] O. Thawakar, S. Venkatraman, R. Thawkar, A. Shaker, H. Cholakkal, R. M. Anwer, S. Khan, and F. Khan, “Evolmm: Self-evolving large multimodal models with continuous re-wards,” 2026. 1 [37] M. Sunil, M. Venmathimaran, and M. S. Kavitha, “irea-soner: Trajectory-aware intrinsic reasoning supervision for self-evolving large multimodal models,” 2026. 1 [38] S. Venkatraman, R. Thawkar, O. Thawakar, R. M. Anwer, H. Cholakkal, S. Khan, and F. Khan, “Paying more attention to visual tokens in self-evolving large multimodal models,” 2026. 1[39] H. Zhou, K.-H. Lee, Z. Zhan, Y. Chen, Z. Li, Z. Wang, H. Had-dadi, and E. Yilmaz, “Trustrag: Enhancing robustness and trustworthiness in retrieval-augmented generation,” 2025. 1, 25 [40] X. Liang, S. Niu, Z. Li, S. Zhang, H. Wang, F. Xiong, Z. Fan, B. Tang, J. Zhao, J. Yang, et al. , “Saferag: benchmarking security in retrieval-augmented generation of large language model,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long 30 

Papers) , pp. 4609–4631, 2025. 1 [41] T. Fan, J. Wang, X. Ren, and C. Huang, “Minirag: Towards ex-tremely simple retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06713 , 2025. 1 [42] L. Wang, H. Chen, N. Yang, X. Huang, Z. Dou, and F. Wei, “Chain-of-retrieval augmented generation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, pp. 59888– 59915, 2026. 1, 8 [43] Z. Qi, R. Xu, Z. Guo, C. Wang, H. Zhang, and W. Xu, “Long 2rag: Evaluating long-context & long-form retrieval-augmented generation with key point recall,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pp. 4852–4872, 2024. 1 [44] H. Snyder, “Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines,” Journal of business research , vol. 104, pp. 333–339, 2019. 2 [45] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rock-täschel, et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. 2, 4, 19 [46] P. Sarthi, S. Abdullah, A. Tuli, S. Khanna, A. Goldie, and C. Manning, “Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, pp. 32628–32649, 2024. 2, 6, 7, 8 [47] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,” in International conference on learning representa-tions , vol. 2024, pp. 9112–9141, 2024. 2, 7, 10, 11 [48] Y. Gao, T. Sheng, Y. Xiang, Y. Xiong, H. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Chat-rec: Towards interactive and explain-able llms-augmented recommender system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14524 , 2023. 2, 7, 12, 13 [49] Z. Shi, S. Zhang, W. Sun, S. Gao, P. Ren, Z. Chen, and Z. Ren, “Generate-then-ground in retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop question answering,” in Proceedings of the 62nd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7339–7353, 2024. 2, 7, 15, 16, 17 [50] B. J. Gutiérrez, Y. Shu, Y. Gu, M. Yasunaga, and Y. Su, “Hip-porag: Neurobiologically inspired long-term memory for large language models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 37, pp. 59532–59569, 2024. 3 [51] Z. Chen, C. Xu, D. Wang, Z. Huang, Y. Dou, X. Jiang, and J. Guo, “Rulerag: Rule-guided retrieval-augmented generation with language models for question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22353 , 2024. 3 [52] Y. Xi, W. Liu, J. Lin, B. Chen, R. Tang, W. Zhang, and Y. Yu, “Memocrs: Memory-enhanced sequential conversational recom-mender systems with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , pp. 2585–2595, 2024. 3 [53] Z. Chu, H. Fan, J. Chen, Q. Wang, M. Yang, J. Liang, Z. Wang, H. Li, G. Tang, M. Liu, et al. , “Self-critique guided itera-tive reasoning for multi-hop question answering,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pp. 2415–2438, 2025. 3 [54] S. Zhao, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. He, L. K. Qiu, and L. Qiu, “Retrieval augmented generation (rag) and beyond: A compre-hensive survey on how to make your llms use external data more wisely,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14924 , 2024. 3 [55] L. Brehme, T. Ströhle, and R. Breu, “Can LLMs be trusted for evaluating RAG systems? a survey of methods and datasets,” in 

2025 IEEE Swiss Conference on Data Science (SDS) , pp. 16– 23, IEEE, 2025. 5 [56] M. Hindi, L. Mohammed, O. Maaz, and A. Alwarafy, “Enhanc-ing the precision and interpretability of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) in legal technology: A survey,” IEEE Access ,2025. 5 [57] B. Ni, Z. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Lei, Y. Zhao, X. Cheng, Q. Zeng, L. Dong, Y. Xia, K. Kenthapadi, R. Rossi, F. Dernoncourt, M. M. Tanjim, N. Ahmed, X. Liu, W. Fan, E. Blasch, Y. Wang, M. Jiang, and T. Derr, “Towards trustworthy retrieval aug-mented generation for large language models: A survey,” 2025. 5[58] X. Zheng, Z. Weng, Y. Lyu, L. Jiang, H. Xue, B. Ren, D. Paudel, N. Sebe, L. V. Gool, and X. Hu, “Retrieval aug-mented generation and understanding in vision: A survey and new outlook,” 2025. 5, 26 [59] A. J. Oche, A. G. Folashade, T. Ghosal, and A. Biswas, “A systematic review of key retrieval-augmented generation (rag) systems: Progress, gaps, and future directions,” 2025. 5 [60] X. Cheng, X. Wang, X. Zhang, T. Ge, S.-Q. Chen, F. Wei, H. Zhang, and D. Zhao, “xrag: Extreme context compression for retrieval-augmented generation with one token,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 109487– 109516, 2024. 6, 7, 8 [61] C.-M. Chan, C. Xu, R. Yuan, H. Luo, W. Xue, Y. Guo, and J. Fu, “Rq-rag: Learning to refine queries for retrieval aug-mented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00610 , 2024. 6, 7, 8 [62] H. Zamani and M. Bendersky, “Stochastic rag: End-to-end retrieval-augmented generation through expected utility maxi-mization,” 2024. 6, 7, 8 [63] P. Zhao, H. Zhang, Q. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Geng, F. Fu, L. Yang, W. Zhang, J. Jiang, and B. Cui, “Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for ai-generated content: A survey,” Data Science and Engineering , pp. 1–29, 2026. 7, 10, 11 [64] W. Zou, R. Geng, B. Wang, and J. Jia, “ {PoisonedRAG }:Knowledge corruption attacks to {Retrieval-Augmented } gen-eration of large language models,” in 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) , pp. 3827–3844, 2025. 7, 10, 11 [65] T. E. Kim and F. Diaz, “Towards fair rag: On the impact of fair ranking in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 2025 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Innova-tive Concepts and Theories in Information Retrieval (ICTIR) ,pp. 33–43, 2025. 7, 10, 12 [66] S. Zerhoudi and M. Granitzer, “Personarag: Enhancing retrieval-augmented generation systems with user-centric agents,” 2026. 7, 12, 13 [67] Y. Shi, X. Zi, Z. Shi, H. Zhang, Q. Wu, and M. Xu, “Er-agent: Enhancing retrieval-augmented language models with improved accuracy, efficiency, and personalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06683 , 2024. 7, 12, 13, 14 [68] M. Gaur, K. Gunaratna, V. Srinivasan, and H. Jin, “Iseeq: Information seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval and knowledge graphs,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 36, pp. 10672–10680, 2022. 7, 12, 13 [69] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabhar-wal, “Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions,” in Proceedings of the 61st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers) , pp. 10014–10037, 2023. 7, 15, 16 [70] P. Verma, S. P. Midigeshi, G. Sinha, A. Solin, N. Natarajan, and A. Sharma, “Plan-rag: Planning-guided retrieval augmented generation,” 2024. 7, 15, 17 [71] X. He, Y. Tian, Y. Sun, N. V. Chawla, T. Laurent, Y. LeCun, X. Bresson, and B. Hooi, “G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation for textual graph understanding and question an-swering,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 37, pp. 132876–132907, 2024. 7, 15, 16, 26 [72] Y. Ma, Y. Cao, Y. Hong, and A. Sun, “Large language model is not a good few-shot information extractor, but a good reranker for hard samples!,” in Findings of the association for computa-tional linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 10572–10601, 2023. 7, 10, 11 [73] T. Merth, Q. Fu, M. Rastegari, and M. Najibi, “Superposition prompting: Improving and accelerating retrieval-augmented generation, 2024,” URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2404.06910 . 7, 8[74] S. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, S. Sun, R. Xu, C. Zhu, and M. Zeng, “Training data is more valuable than you think: A simple and effective method by retrieving from training data,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 3170– 3179, 2022. 7 [75] S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, J. Hoffmann, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, K. Millican, G. B. Van Den Driessche, J.-B. Lespiau, B. Damoc, A. Clark, et al. , “Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 2206–2240, PMLR, 2022. 7 [76] F. Shi, X. Chen, K. Misra, N. Scales, D. Dohan, E. H. Chi, 31 

N. Schärli, and D. Zhou, “Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 31210–31227, PMLR, 2023. 8 [77] T. Shen, G. Long, X. Geng, C. Tao, Y. Lei, T. Zhou, M. Blu-menstein, and D. Jiang, “Retrieval-augmented retrieval: Large language models are strong zero-shot retriever,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pp. 15933–15946, 2024. 8 [78] Z. Guo, S. Cheng, Y. Wang, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “Prompt-guided retrieval augmentation for non-knowledge-intensive tasks,” in 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 10896–10912, 2023. 8 [79] M. Santacroce, Z. Wen, Y. Shen, and Y. Li, “What matters in the structured pruning of generative language models?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03773 , 2023. 8 [80] J. Liu, T. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Zhao, and K. Liu, “Enhancing large language models with pseudo-and multisource-knowledge graphs for open-ended question answering,” in 2025 IEEE 41st International Conference on Data Engineering Workshops (ICDEW) , pp. 97–106, IEEE, 2025. 8 [81] W. Yu, “Retrieval-augmented generation across heterogeneous knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 2022 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguis-tics: human language technologies: student research workshop ,pp. 52–58, 2022. 9 [82] Z. Dai, V. Y. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Luan, J. Ni, J. Lu, A. Bakalov, K. Guu, K. B. Hall, and M.-W. Chang, “Promptagator: Few-shot dense retrieval from 8 examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11755 , 2022. 9 [83] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, M. Wang, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for large language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2023. 9, 23, 25 [84] D. Cheng, S. Huang, J. Bi, Y. Zhan, J. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Sun, F. Wei, W. Deng, and Q. Zhang, “Uprise: Universal prompt retrieval for improving zero-shot evaluation,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pp. 12318–12337, 2023. 9 [85] J. Lin, X. Dai, Y. Xi, W. Liu, B. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Wu, X. Li, C. Zhu, et al. , “How can recommender systems benefit from large language models: A survey,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 1–47, 2025. 9 [86] S. Setty, H. Thakkar, A. Lee, E. Chung, and N. Vidra, “Im-proving retrieval for rag based question answering models on financial documents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07221 , 2024. 9[87] N. Pipitone and G. H. Alami, “Legalbench-rag: A benchmark for retrieval-augmented generation in the legal domain,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10343 , 2024. 9 [88] A. Mahboub, M. E. Za’ter, B. Al-Rfooh, Y. Estaitia, A. Jaljuli, and A. Hakouz, “Evaluation of semantic search and its role in retrieved-augmented-generation (rag) for arabic language,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18350 , 2024. 9 [89] F. Hijazi, S. AlHarbi, A. AlHussein, H. Shairah, R. Alzahrani, H. AlShamlan, G. Turkiyyah, and O. Knio, “Arablegaleval: A multitask benchmark for assessing arabic legal knowledge in large language models,” in Proceedings of the Second Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference , pp. 225–249, 2024. 9 [90] J. Shin, N. S. Harzevili, R. Aleithan, H. Hemmati, and S. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented test generation: How far are we?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12682 , 2024. 9 [91] S. Rajput, N. Mehta, A. Singh, R. Hulikal Keshavan, T. Vu, L. Heldt, L. Hong, Y. Tay, V. Tran, J. Samost, et al. , “Recom-mender systems with generative retrieval,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 10299–10315, 2023. 9 [92] Y. Lu, L. Chen, Y. Zhang, M. Shen, H. Wang, X. Wang, C. van Rechem, T. Fu, and W. Wei, “Machine learning for synthetic data generation: a review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04062 ,2023. 9 [93] J. Jin, Y. Zhu, Z. Dou, G. Dong, X. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhao, Z. Yang, and J.-R. Wen, “Flashrag: A modular toolkit for effi-cient retrieval-augmented generation research,” in Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 , pp. 737–740, 2025. 9 [94] D. Fleischer, M. Berchansky, M. Wasserblat, and P. Izsak, “Rag foundry: A framework for enhancing llms for retrieval aug-mented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02545 , 2024. 9 [95] X. Zhang, Y.-Z. Song, Y. Wang, S. Tang, X. Li, Z. Zeng, Z. Wu, W. Ye, W. Xu, Y. Zhang, et al. , “Raglab: A modular and research-oriented unified framework for retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demon-strations , pp. 408–418, 2024. 9 [96] S. Es, J. James, L. E. Anke, and S. Schockaert, “Ragas: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” in 

Proceedings of the 18th conference of the european chapter of the association for computational linguistics: system demon-strations , pp. 150–158, 2024. 9, 26 [97] R. Friel, M. Belyi, and A. Sanyal, “Ragbench: Explainable benchmark for retrieval-augmented generation systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11005 , 2024. 9, 26 [98] M. Nandakishor, “Deeprag: building a custom hindi embedding model for retrieval augmented generation from scratch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08213 , 2025. 9 [99] B. Wan, F. Zhang, Z. Qi, J. Ding, J. Li, B. Fan, Y. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Cognitive-aligned document selection for retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11770 ,2025. 11 [100] Y. Ji, H. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Bias evaluation and mitigation in retrieval-augmented medical question-answering systems,” 2025. 11 [101] W. Seo, Z. Yuan, and Y. Bu, “Valuesrag: Enhancing cultural alignment through retrieval-augmented contextual learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , vol. 8, pp. 2307–2318, 2025. 11 [102] Y. Zhou, W. Zhang, J. Shao, Y. Liu, X. Li, J. Jin, H. Qian, Z. Liu, C. Li, J. C. Zhang, et al. , “Trustworthiness in retrieval-augmented generation systems: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10102 , 2024. 11, 25 [103] O. Ovadia, M. Brief, M. Mishaeli, and O. Elisha, “Fine-tuning or retrieval? comparing knowledge injection in llms,” in Pro-ceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pp. 237–250, 2024. 11 [104] S. Tonmoy, S. Zaman, V. Jain, A. Rani, V. Rawte, A. Chadha, and A. Das, “A comprehensive survey of hallucination miti-gation techniques in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01313 , 2024. 11 [105] P. Zhou, Y. Feng, and Z. Yang, “Privacy-aware rag: Secure and isolated knowledge retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15548 , 2025. 11 [106] S. Zeng, J. Zhang, P. He, Y. Xing, Y. Liu, H. Xu, J. Ren, S. Wang, D. Yin, Y. Chang, and J. Tang, “The good and the bad: Exploring privacy issues in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG),” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 (L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Sriku-mar, eds.), (Bangkok, Thailand), pp. 4505–4524, Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024. 11 [107] J. Xue, M. Zheng, Y. Hu, F. Liu, X. Chen, and Q. Lou, “Badrag: Identifying vulnerabilities in retrieval augmented generation of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00083 ,2024. 11 [108] S. Zeng, J. Zhang, P. He, Y. Xing, Y. Liu, H. Xu, J. Ren, S. Wang, D. Yin, Y. Chang, and J. Tang, “The good and the bad: Exploring privacy issues in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG),” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 (L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Sriku-mar, eds.), (Bangkok, Thailand), pp. 4505–4524, Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024. 11 [109] I. Ziegler, A. Köksal, D. Elliott, and H. Schütze, “Craft your dataset: Task-specific synthetic dataset generation through cor-pus retrieval and augmentation,” Transactions of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics , vol. 13, pp. 1693–1721, 2025. 11 [110] S. H. Jayasundara, N. A. G. Arachchilage, and G. Russello, “Ragent: Retrieval-based access control policy generation,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07489 , 2024. 11 [111] Z. Chen, J. Liu, H. Liu, Q. Cheng, F. Zhang, W. Lu, and X. Liu, “Black-box opinion manipulation attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models,” 2024. 11 [112] J. Wu, S. Zhang, F. Che, M. Feng, P. Shao, and J. Tao, “Pandora’s box or aladdin’s lamp: A comprehensive analysis revealing the role of rag noise in large language models,” in 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 32 

Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 5019– 5039, 2025. 11 [113] F. Ye, S. Li, Y. Zhang, and L. Chen, “R2ag: Incorporating retrieval information into retrieval augmented generation,” in 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 11584–11596, 2024. 11 [114] Z. Zhu, Y. Yang, and Z. Sun, “Halueval-wild: Evaluating hal-lucinations of language models in the wild,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04307 , 2024. 12 [115] B. He, N. Chen, X. He, L. Yan, Z. Wei, J. Luo, and Z.-H. Ling, “Retrieving, rethinking and revising: The chain-of-verification can improve retrieval augmented generation,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pp. 10371–10393, 2024. 12 [116] A. C. Stickland, S. Sengupta, J. Krone, S. Mansour, and H. He, “Robustification of multilingual language models to real-world noise in crosslingual zero-shot settings with robust contrastive pretraining,” in Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the Euro-pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pp. 1375–1391, 2023. 12 [117] R. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Qu, W. X. Zhao, J. Liu, H. Wu, J.-R. Wen, and H. Wang, “Investigating the factual knowledge boundary of large language models with retrieval augmentation,” in Pro-ceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pp. 3697–3715, 2025. 12 [118] L. Zeng, R. Gupta, D. Motwani, D. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Worse than zero-shot? a fact-checking dataset for evaluating the robustness of rag against misleading retrievals,” 2025. 12 [119] Y. Hui, Y. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Uda: A benchmark suite for re-trieval augmented generation in real-world document analysis,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 67200–67217, 2024. 12 [120] D. Rau, H. Déjean, N. Chirkova, T. Formal, S. Wang, S. Clin-chant, and V. Nikoulina, “Bergen: A benchmarking library for retrieval-augmented generation,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 7640–7663, 2024. 12, 26 [121] Y. Xu, T. Cai, J. Jiang, and X. Song, “Face4rag: Factual consistency evaluation for retrieval augmented generation in chinese,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pp. 6083–6094, 2024. 12 [122] T. E. Kim and F. Diaz, “Towards fair rag: On the impact of fair ranking in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 2025 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Innova-tive Concepts and Theories in Information Retrieval (ICTIR) ,ICTIR ’25, (New York, NY, USA), p. 33–43, Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. 12 [123] F. Periti and S. Saha, “The synergistic integration of access con-trol management and large language model agents: A survey,” 

TechRxiv , vol. 2026, no. 0210, 2026. 12 [124] S. Jeong, J. Baek, S. Cho, S. J. Hwang, and J. C. Park, “Adaptive-rag: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity,” in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7036–7050, 2024. 13 [125] L. Reynolds and K. McDonell, “Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-shot paradigm,” in Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pp. 1–7, 2021. 13 [126] L. Yang, H. Chen, Z. Li, X. Ding, and X. Wu, “Give us the facts: Enhancing large language models with knowledge graphs for fact-aware language modeling,” IEEE Transactions on Knowl-edge and Data Engineering , vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3091–3110, 2024. 13 [127] G. Frisoni, A. Cocchieri, A. Presepi, G. Moro, and Z. Meng, “To generate or to retrieve? on the effectiveness of artificial contexts for medical open-domain question answering,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 9878–9919, 2024. 13 [128] Q. Gou, Z. Xia, B. Yu, H. Yu, F. Huang, Y. Li, and N. Cam-Tu, “Diversify question generation with retrieval-augmented style transfer,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 1677–1690, 2023. 13 [129] D. S. Mitra, “Ai-powered adaptive education for disabled learn-ers,” Available at SSRN 5042713 , 2024. 14 [130] H. Keuning, J. Jeuring, and B. Heeren, “A systematic literature review of automated feedback generation for programming ex-ercises,” ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE) ,vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2018. 14 [131] J. Rao and J. Lin, “Ramo: Retrieval-augmented genera-tion for enhancing moocs recommendations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04925 , 2024. 14 [132] R. Taiwo, I. T. Bello, S. F. Abdulai, A.-M. Yussif, B. A. Salami, A. Saka, and T. Zayed, “Generative ai in the con-struction industry: A state-of-the-art analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09939 , 2024. 14 [133] Z. Levonian, C. Li, W. Zhu, A. Gade, O. Henkel, M.-E. Postle, and W. Xing, “Retrieval-augmented generation to im-prove math question-answering: Trade-offs between grounded-ness and human preference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03184 ,2023. 14 [134] S. McGregor, A. Ettinger, N. Judd, P. Albee, L. Jiang, K. Rao, W. H. Smith, S. Longpre, A. Ghosh, C. Fiorelli, et al. , “To err is ai: A case study informing llm flaw reporting practices,” in 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 39, pp. 28938–28945, 2025. 14 [135] Y. Jin, M. Chandra, G. Verma, Y. Hu, M. De Choudhury, and S. Kumar, “Better to ask in english: Cross-lingual evaluation of large language models for healthcare queries,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pp. 2627–2638, 2024. 14 [136] N. Jiang, X. Li, S. Wang, Q. Zhou, S. B. Hossain, B. Ray, V. Ku-mar, X. Ma, and A. Deoras, “Ledex: Training llms to better self-debug and explain code,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 35517–35543, 2024. 14 [137] S. Huang, X. Tao, S. Yuan, Y. Zhang, P. Li, H. A. Beilinson, Y. Zhang, W. Yu, P. Pontarotti, H. Escriva, et al. , “Discovery of an active rag transposon illuminates the origins of v (d) j recombination,” Cell , vol. 166, no. 1, pp. 102–114, 2016. 14 [138] C. Tao, T. Shen, S. Gao, J. Zhang, Z. Li, K. Hua, W. Hu, Z. Tao, and S. Ma, “Llms are also effective embedding models: An in-depth overview,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12591 , 2024. 14 [139] M. Dassen, R. Kotula, K. Murray, A. Yates, D. Lawrie, E. Kayi, J. Mayfield, and K. Duh, “Factum: mechanistic detection of ci-tation hallucination in long-form rag,” in European Conference on Information Retrieval , pp. 272–288, Springer, 2026. 14 [140] L. Zha, J. Zhou, L. Li, R. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Yang, J. Yuan, C. Su, X. Li, A. Su, et al. , “Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language and commands into one gpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08674 , 2023. 14 [141] D. Zhu, X. Shen, X. Li, M. Elhoseiny, et al. , “Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, pp. 18378–18394, 2024. 14, 26 [142] Q. Ye, H. Xu, G. Xu, J. Ye, M. Yan, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, A. Hu, P. Shi, Y. Shi, et al. , “mplug-owl: Modularization empowers large language models with multimodality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178 , 2023. 14, 26 [143] Z. Ke, W. Kong, C. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Mei, and M. Bendersky, “Bridging the preference gap between retrievers and llms,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pp. 10438–10451, 2024. 14 [144] V. Lin, X. Chen, M. Chen, W. Shi, M. Lomeli, R. James, P. Rodriguez, J. Kahn, G. Szilvasy, M. Lewis, et al. , “Ra-dit: Retrieval-augmented dual instruction tuning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, pp. 19138– 19162, 2024. 14 [145] M. Seo, J. Baek, J. Thorne, and S. J. Hwang, “Retrieval-augmented data augmentation for low-resource domain tasks,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13482 , 2024. 14 [146] D. Yang, J. Rao, K. Chen, X. Guo, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Im-rag: Multi-round retrieval-augmented genera-tion through learning inner monologues,” in Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pp. 730–740, 2024. 15 [147] Y. Tevissen, K. Guetari, and F. Petitpont, “Towards retrieval augmented generation over large video libraries,” in 2024 16th International Conference on Human System Interaction (HSI) ,pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2024. 15, 26 [148] F. Mumuni and A. Mumuni, “Explainable artificial intelligence 33 

(xai): from inherent explainability to large language models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09967 , 2025. 15 [149] G. d. A. e Aquino, N. d. S. de Azevedo, L. Y. S. Okimoto, L. Y. S. Camelo, H. L. de Souza Bragança, R. Fernandes, A. Printes, F. Cardoso, R. Gomes, and I. G. Torné, “From rag to multi-agent systems: A survey of modern approaches in llm development,” 2025. 15 [150] M. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Yang, S. Yu, B. Lin, and X. He, “Automan-ual: Constructing instruction manuals by llm agents via interac-tive environmental learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 589–631, 2024. 16 [151] S. Liu, Y. Chen, X. Xie, J. Siow, and Y. Liu, “Retrieval-augmented generation for code summarization via hybrid gnn,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05405 , 2020. 16 [152] C. Guo, X. Liu, C. Xie, A. Zhou, Y. Zeng, Z. Lin, D. Song, and B. Li, “Redcode: Risky code execution and generation benchmark for code agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 106190–106236, 2024. 16 [153] F. Pan, M. Canim, M. Glass, A. Gliozzo, and J. Hendler, “End-to-end table question answering via retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16714 , 2022. 16 [154] M. Kang, J. M. Kwak, J. Baek, and S. J. Hwang, “Knowledge graph-augmented language models for knowledge-grounded di-alogue generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18846 , 2023. 16, 26 [155] T. T. Procko and O. Ochoa, “Graph retrieval-augmented gener-ation for large language models: A survey,” in 2024 Conference on AI, science, engineering, and technology (AIxSET) , pp. 166– 169, IEEE, 2024. 16, 26 [156] G. Kim, S. Kim, B. Jeon, J. Park, and J. Kang, “Tree of clarifications: Answering ambiguous questions with retrieval-augmented large language models,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pp. 996–1009, 2023. 16 [157] D. Arora, A. Kini, S. R. Chowdhury, N. Natarajan, G. Sinha, and A. Sharma, “Gar-meets-rag paradigm for zero-shot infor-mation retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20158 , 2023. 16 [158] F. Luo and M. Surdeanu, “Divide & conquer for entailment-aware multi-hop evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02616 , 2023. 16 [159] Y. Bai, Y. Miao, L. Chen, D. Wang, D. Li, Y. Ren, H. Xie, C. Yang, and X. Cai, “Pistis-rag: Enhancing retrieval-augmented generation with human feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00072 , 2024. 17 [160] T. W. Webb, K. J. Holyoak, and H. Lu, “Evidence from coun-terfactual tasks supports emergent analogical reasoning in large language models,” PNAS nexus , vol. 4, no. 5, p. pgaf135, 2025. 17 [161] X. Wang, H. Peng, Y. Guan, K. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Hou, X. Han, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, R. Xie, et al. , “Maven-arg: Completing the puzzle of all-in-one event understanding dataset with event argument annotation,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 4072–4091, 2024. 17 [162] T. Webb, K. J. Holyoak, and H. Lu, “Emergent analogical reasoning in large language models,” Nature Human Behaviour ,vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 1526–1541, 2023. 17 [163] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subrama-nian, E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long context large language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, pp. 49569– 49584, 2024. 17 [164] B. Wang, W. Ping, L. McAfee, P. Xu, B. Li, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Instructretro: Instruction tuning post retrieval-augmented pretraining,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07713 ,2023. 17 [165] G. Chen, W. Yu, X. Lu, X. Zhang, E. Meng, and L. Sha, “Unlocking multi-view insights in knowledge-dense retrieval-augmented generation,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing , 2025. 17 [166] Z. Chen, J. Liu, H. Liu, Q. Cheng, F. Zhang, W. Lu, and X. Liu, “Black-box opinion manipulation attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13757 , 2024. 17, 19 [167] L. Chen, R. Zhang, J. Guo, Y. Fan, and X. Cheng, “Con-trolling risk of retrieval-augmented generation: A counterfac-tual prompting framework,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 (Y. Al-Onaizan, M. Bansal, and Y.-N. Chen, eds.), (Miami, Florida, USA), pp. 2380–2393, Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2024. 17 [168] K. Wang, F. Duan, P. Li, S. Wang, and X. Cai, “Llms know what they need: Leveraging a missing information guided framework to empower retrieval-augmented generation,” in 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics , pp. 2379–2400, 2025. 17, 19 [169] W. Su, Y. Tang, Q. Ai, Z. Wu, and Y. Liu, “Dragin: Dynamic retrieval augmented generation based on the real-time infor-mation needs of large language models,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 12991–13013, 2024. 17, 19 [170] S. Wang, X. Yu, M. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Zhu, and Z. Dou, “Richrag: Crafting rich responses for multi-faceted queries in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pp. 11317–11333, 2025. 17 [171] Y. Lu, X. Zhao, and J. Wang, “ClinicalRAG: Enhancing clinical decision support through heterogeneous knowledge retrieval,” in Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Towards Knowledgeable Language Models (KnowLLM 2024) (S. Li, M. Li, M. J. Zhang, E. Choi, M. Geva, P. Hase, and H. Ji, eds.), (Bangkok, Thai-land), pp. 64–68, Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024. 17 [172] Y. Ahn, S.-G. Lee, J. Shim, and J. Park, “Retrieval-augmented response generation for knowledge-grounded conversation in the wild,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 131374–131385, 2022. 17 [173] S. Siriwardhana, R. Weerasekera, E. Wen, T. Kaluarachchi, R. Rana, and S. Nanayakkara, “Improving the domain adap-tation of retrieval augmented generation (rag) models for open domain question answering,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 11, pp. 1–17, 01 2023. 17 [174] T. Zhang, S. G. Patil, N. Jain, S. Shen, M. Zaharia, I. Stoica, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Raft: Adapting language model to domain specific rag,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10131 , 2024. 17 [175] S. Imani, L. Du, and H. Shrivastava, “MathPrompter: Mathe-matical reasoning using large language models,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 5: Industry Track) (S. Sitaram, B. Beigman Klebanov, and J. D. Williams, eds.), (Toronto, Canada), pp. 37–42, Association for Computational Linguis-tics, July 2023. 17 [176] K. Verma, M. Moore, S. Wottrich, K. R. López, N. Aggar-wal, Z. Bhatt, A. Singh, B. Unroe, S. Basheer, N. Sachdeva, 

et al. , “Emulating human cognitive processes for expert-level medical question-answering with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11266 , 2023. 17 [177] J. Lála, O. O’Donoghue, A. Shtedritski, S. Cox, S. G. Ro-driques, and A. D. White, “Paperqa: Retrieval-augmented generative agent for scientific research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07559 , 2023. 18 [178] Y. Ke, L. Jin, K. Elangovan, H. R. Abdullah, N. Liu, A. T. H. Sia, C. R. Soh, J. Y. M. Tung, J. C. L. Ong, and D. S. W. Ting, “Development and testing of retrieval augmented generation in large language models–a case study report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01733 , 2024. 18 [179] Y. Shi, T. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Li, T. Liu, X. Li, and N. Liu, “Searchrag: can search engines be helpful for llm-based medical question answering?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13233 , 2025. 18 [180] R. Kalra, Z. Wu, A. Gulley, A. Hilliard, X. Guan, A. Koshiyama, and P. C. Treleaven, “HyPA-RAG: A hybrid parameter adaptive retrieval-augmented generation system for AI legal and policy applications,” in Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: Industry Track) , pp. 1036–1054, Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2025. 18 [181] N. Wiratunga, R. Abeyratne, L. Jayawardena, K. Mar-tin, S. Massie, I. Nkisi-Orji, R. Weerasinghe, A. Liret, and B. Fleisch, “CBR-RAG: case-based reasoning for retrieval aug-mented generation in LLMs for legal question answering,” in 

International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning , pp. 445– 460, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. 18 34 

[182] A. Majumder, K. Bhattacharya, and A. Chakrabarti, “Develop-ment and evaluation of a retrieval-augmented generation tool for creating sapphire models of artificial systems,” in Inter-national Conference on Research into Design , pp. 489–504, Springer, 2025. 18 [183] S. Kahl, F. Löffler, M. Maciol, F. Ridder, M. Schmitz, J. Spanagel, J. Wienkamp, C. Burgahn, and M. Schilling, “En-hancing ai tutoring in robotics education: evaluating the effect of retrieval-augmented generation and fine-tuning on large lan-guage models,” Autonomous Intelligent Systems Group , 2024. 18 [184] S. Wang, J. Liu, S. Song, J. Cheng, Y. Fu, P. Guo, K. Fang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Dou, “Domainrag: A chinese benchmark for eval-uating domain-specific retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05654 , 2024. 18 [185] P. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, T. Wang, W. Shi, S. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Y. Zou, and H. Yao, “Mmed-rag: Versatile multimodal rag system for medical vision language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, pp. 66188– 66217, 2025. 18 [186] G. Guinet, B. Omidvar-Tehrani, A. Deoras, and L. Cal-lot, “Automated evaluation of retrieval-augmented language models with task-specific exam generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13622 , 2024. 18 [187] Y. Tao, Y. Li, Y. Qin, and Y. Liu, “Retrieval-augmented code generation: A survey with focus on repository-level ap-proaches,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04905 , 2025. 19 [188] K. Du, J. Chen, R. Rui, H. Chai, L. Fu, W. Xia, Y. Wang, R. Tang, Y. Yu, and W. Zhang, “Codegrag: Bridging the gap between natural language and programming language via graphical retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02355 , 2024. 19 [189] Z. Yu, S. Liu, P. Denny, A. Bergen, and M. Liut, “Integrating small language models with retrieval-augmented generation in computing education: Key takeaways, setup, and practical insights,” in Proceedings of the 56th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , pp. 1302–1308, 2025. 19 [190] Y.-Z. Lin, K. Petal, A. H. Alhamadah, S. Ghimire, M. W. Redondo, D. R. V. Corona, J. Pacheco, S. Salehi, and P. Satam, “Personalized education with generative ai and digital twins: Vr, rag, and zero-shot sentiment analysis for industry 4.0 work-force development,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14080 , 2025. 19 [191] T. Cai, Z. Tan, X. Song, T. Sun, J. Jiang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, and J. Gu, “Forag: Factuality-optimized retrieval augmented generation for web-enhanced long-form question answering,” in 

Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-edge Discovery and Data Mining , pp. 199–210, 2024. 19, 25 [192] W. Xie, X. Liang, Y. Liu, K. Ni, H. Cheng, and Z. Hu, “Weknow-rag: An adaptive approach for retrieval-augmented generation integrating web search and knowledge graphs,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07611 , 2024. 19 [193] Z. Shi, S. Zhang, W. Sun, S. Gao, P. Ren, Z. Chen, and Z. Ren, “Generate-then-ground in retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop question answering,” in Proceedings of the 62nd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7339–7353, 2024. 19 [194] S. Sharma, D. S. Yoon, F. Dernoncourt, D. Sultania, K. Bagga, M. Zhang, T. Bui, and V. Kotte, “Retrieval augmented gener-ation for domain-specific question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14760 , 2024. 19 [195] Z. Zhang, M. Fang, and L. Chen, “Retrievalqa: Assessing adaptive retrieval-augmented generation for short-form open-domain question answering,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pp. 6963–6975, 2024. 19 [196] S. Setty, H. Thakkar, A. Lee, E. Chung, and N. Vidra, “Im-proving retrieval for rag based question answering models on financial documents,” 2024. 19 [197] C.-M. Chan, C. Xu, R. Yuan, H. Luo, W. Xue, Y. Guo, and J. Fu, “Rq-rag: Learning to refine queries for retrieval aug-mented generation,” 2024. 19 [198] H. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, N. Cheng, M. Li, and J. Xiao, “PRCA: Fitting black-box large language models for retrieval question answering via pluggable reward-driven con-textual adapter,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (H. Bouamor, J. Pino, and K. Bali, eds.), (Singapore), pp. 5364–5375, Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2023. 19 [199] Y. Xu, T. Cai, J. Jiang, and X. Song, “Face4rag: Factual consistency evaluation for retrieval augmented generation in chinese,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’24, (New York, NY, USA), p. 6083–6094, Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. 19, 25, 26 [200] M. Chen, J. Tworek, and H. Jun, “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” 2021. 20 [201] GitHub, “Introducing github copilot: Your ai pair program-mer.” https://github.blog, 2021. 20 [202] H. Tan, Q. Luo, L. Jiang, Z. Zhan, J. Li, H. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Prompt-based code completion via multi-retrieval augmented generation,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. ,vol. 35, Dec. 2025. 20 [203] N. Baumann, J. S. Diaz, J. Michael, L. Netz, H. Nqiri, J. Reimer, and B. Rumpe, “Combining retrieval-augmented generation and few-shot learning for model synthesis of un-common DSLs,” in Modellierung 2024 Satellite Events , pp. 10– 18420, Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V., 2024. 20 [204] Y. Wang, H. Le, A. Gotmare, N. Bui, J. Li, and S. Hoi, “Codet5+: Open code large language models for code under-standing and generation,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pp. 1069–1088, 2023. 20 [205] Z. F. Han, J. Lin, A. Gurung, D. R. Thomas, E. Chen, C. Borchers, S. Gupta, and K. R. Koedinger, “Improving as-sessment of tutoring practices using retrieval-augmented gener-ation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14594 , 2024. 21 [206] S. Jacobs and S. Jaschke, “Leveraging lecture content for improved feedback: Explorations with GPT-4 and retrieval augmented generation,” in 2024 36th International Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEE&T) ,pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2024. 21 [207] M. Bucur, “Exploring large language models and retrieval augmented generation for automated form filling,” bachelor’s thesis, University of Twente, 2023. 21 [208] Y. Hu and Y. Lu, “RAG and RAU: A survey on retrieval-augmented language model in natural language processing,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19543 , 2024. 22 [209] G. Chen, W. Yu, X. Lu, X. Zhang, E. Meng, and L. Sha, “Unlocking multi-view insights in knowledge-dense retrieval-augmented generation,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing , 2025. 22 [210] H. Zhou, H. Gu, Z. Zhan, X. Liu, K. Zhou, Y. Xiao, M. Liang, 

et al. , “The efficiency vs. accuracy trade-off: Optimizing RAG-enhanced LLM recommender systems using multi-head early exit,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pp. 26443–26458, 2025. 23 [211] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 38, pp. 17754–17762, 2024. 23 [212] M. Shen, M. Umar, K. Maeng, G. E. Suh, and U. Gupta, “To-wards understanding systems trade-offs in retrieval-augmented generation model inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11854 ,2024. 23 [213] A. Balaguer, V. Benara, R. L. d. F. Cunha, T. Hendry, D. Hol-stein, J. Marsman, N. Mecklenburg, et al. , “RAG vs fine-tuning: pipelines, tradeoffs, and a case study on agriculture,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08406 , 2024. 23 [214] Q. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Bei, Z. Yuan, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, H. Chen, et al. , “A survey of graph retrieval-augmented gen-eration for customized large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13958 , 2025. 23 [215] R. Anil, A. M. Dai, O. Firat, M. Johnson, D. Lepikhin, A. Pas-sos, S. Shakeri, et al. , “PaLM 2 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403 , 2023. 23 [216] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 38, pp. 17754–17762, 2024. 23 [217] P. Zhao, H. Zhang, Q. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Geng, F. Fu, L. Yang, W. Zhang, J. Jiang, and B. Cui, “Retrieval-augmented genera-tion for ai-generated content: A survey,” 2026. 23 [218] Z. R. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Le, H. S. Zheng, S. Mishra, V. Perot, Y. Zhang, A. Mattapalli, A. Taly, J. Shang, et al. , “Speculative 35 

rag: Enhancing retrieval augmented generation through draft-ing,” 2025. 23 [219] Y. Zhu, H. Yuan, S. Wang, J. Liu, W. Liu, C. Deng, H. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Dou, and J.-R. Wen, “Large language models for information retrieval: A survey,” 2025. 23 [220] S. Li, L. Stenzel, C. Eickhoff, and S. A. Bahrainian, “Enhanc-ing retrieval-augmented generation: a study of best practices,” 2025. 23 [221] P. Wu, X. Zhang, W. Yu, X. Liu, X. Du, and Z. Z. Chen, “Do retrieval-augmented language models adapt to varying user needs?,” 2025. 23 [222] R. Buchmann, J. Eder, H.-G. Fill, U. Frank, D. Karagiannis, E. Laurenzi, J. Mylopoulos, D. Plexousakis, and M. Y. Santos, “Large language models: Expectations for semantics-driven systems engineering,” Data & Knowledge Engineering , vol. 152, p. 102324, 2024. 24 [223] Z. Sun, X. Zang, K. Zheng, J. Xu, X. Zhang, W. Yu, Y. Song, and H. Li, “Redeep: Detecting hallucination in retrieval-augmented generation via mechanistic interpretability,” in In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, pp. 50250–50279, 2025. 24 [224] S. Gupta, R. Ranjan, and S. N. Singh, “A comprehensive sur-vey of retrieval-augmented generation (rag): Evolution, current landscape and future directions,” 2024. 24, 25 [225] S. Siriwardhana, R. Weerasekera, E. Wen, T. Kaluarachchi, R. Rana, and S. Nanayakkara, “Improving the domain adap-tation of retrieval augmented generation (rag) models for open domain question answering,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 11, pp. 1–17, 2023. 24 [226] A. Misrahi, N. Chirkova, M. Louis, and V. Nikoulina, “Adapting large language models for multi-domain retrieval-augmented-generation,” 2025. 24 [227] S. Rakin, M. A. R. Shibly, Z. M. Hossain, M. M. Akbar, and Z. Khan, “Leveraging the domain adaptation of retrieval augmented generation models for question answering and for hallucination reduction,” in International Conference on Infor-mation Technology-New Generations , pp. 482–493, Springer, 2025. 24 [228] S. Zeng, J. Zhang, P. He, J. Ren, T. Zheng, H. Lu, H. Xu, H. Liu, Y. Xing, and J. Tang, “Mitigating the privacy issues in retrieval-augmented generation (rag) via pure synthetic data,” in Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 24538–24569, 2025. 24 [229] S. Wu, Y. Xiong, Y. Cui, H. Wu, C. Chen, Y. Yuan, L. Huang, X. Liu, T.-W. Kuo, N. Guan, et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for natural language processing: A survey,” 2024. 24 [230] V. Kanka, Scaling big data: leveraging LLMs for enterprise success . Libertatem Media Private Limited, 2024. 24 [231] M. A. Ferrag, F. Alwahedi, A. Battah, B. Cherif, A. Mechri, N. Tihanyi, T. Bisztray, and M. Debbah, “Generative ai in cybersecurity: A comprehensive review of llm applications and vulnerabilities,” Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Sys-tems , vol. 5, pp. 1–46, 2025. 24 [232] R. Fayyazi, S. H. Trueba, M. Zuzak, and S. J. Yang, “Proverag: Provenance-driven vulnerability analysis with au-tomated retrieval-augmented llms,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 212815–212826, 2025. 24 [233] D. Sukhwal, “Retrieval augmented generation: An evaluation of RAG-based chatbot for customer support,” Retrieval Aug-mented Generation: An Evaluation of RAG-based Chatbot for Customer Support , 2024. 24 [234] D. Zhao, “Frag: Toward federated vector database management for collaborative and secure retrieval-augmented generation,” 2024. 24 [235] P. Shojaee, S. S. Harsha, D. Luo, A. Maharaj, T. Yu, and Y. Li, “Federated retrieval augmented generation for multi-product question answering,” in Proceedings of the 31st In-ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics: Industry Track , pp. 387–397, 2025. 25 [236] C. Jin, Z. Zhang, X. Jiang, F. Liu, S. Liu, X. Liu, and X. Jin, “Ragcache: Efficient knowledge caching for retrieval-augmented generation,” 2025. 25 [237] Z. Yue, H. Zhuang, A. Bai, K. Hui, R. Jagerman, H. Zeng, Z. Qin, D. Wang, X. Wang, and M. Bendersky, “Inference scaling for long-context retrieval augmented generation,” in In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, pp. 72914–72938, 2025. 25 [238] H. Zhao, F. Yang, B. Shen, H. Lakkaraju, and M. Du, “Towards uncovering how large language model works: An explainability perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10688 , 2024. 25 [239] H. Yu, A. Gan, K. Zhang, S. Tong, Q. Liu, and Z. Liu, “Eval-uation of retrieval-augmented generation: A survey,” in CCF Conference on Big Data , pp. 102–120, Springer, 2024. 25 [240] A. Salemi and H. Zamani, “Evaluating retrieval quality in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-opment in Information Retrieval , pp. 2395–2400, 2024. 25