Title: Delay-Empowered Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12261v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 02:00:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# DECHRL: Empowerment-Driven Delay-Aware Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning 

Chenran Zhao a,1 , Dianxi Shi a,b,1, ∗, Haotian Wang a, Mengzhu Wang d, Yaowen Zhang c, Chunping Qiu b, Shaowu Yang a

> aCollege of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
> bIntelligent Game and Decision Lab (IGDL), Beijing, China
> cInstitute of Military Transportation, Tianjin, China
> dSchool of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China

Abstract 

Many real-world tasks involve delayed effects, where the outcomes of actions emerge after varying time lags. Existing delay-aware reinforcement learning meth-ods often rely on state augmentation, prior knowledge of delay distributions, or access to non-delayed data—limiting their generalization. Hierarchical reinforce-ment learning, by contrast, inherently offers advantages in handling delays due to its hierarchical structure, yet existing methods are restricted to fixed delays. To address these limitations, we propose Delay-Empowered Causal Hierarchi-cal Reinforcement Learning (DECHRL). DECHRL explicitly models both the causal structure of state transitions and their associated stochastic delay distribu-tions. These are then incorporated into a delay-aware empowerment objective that drives proactive exploration toward highly controllable states, thereby improving performance under temporal uncertainty. We evaluate DECHRL in modified 2D-Minecraft and MiniGrid environments featuring stochastic delays. Experimental results show that DECHRL effectively models temporal delays and significantly outperforms baselines in decision-making under temporal uncertainty. 

Keywords: Delay, Empowerment, Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning 

> ∗Corresponding author.
> 1These authors contributed equally to this work.
> arXiv:2605.12261v1 [cs.LG] 12 May 2026

1. Introduction 

In real-world decision-making scenarios, the consequences of a decision often do not manifest immediately but emerge after a period of time in several subsequent steps, i.e., a phenomenon known as delay effects . Without considering such delay effects, traditional RL methods typically assume the immediate transitions between the state-action pair [ 1 ]. As a result, such an oversimplification may result in incorrect credit assignment in reinforcement learning, thus leading to delay-specific bias and hindering its applicability to real-world, delay-aware settings. Recent advances in constructing the Delay-Aware Reinforcement Learning (DARL) framework have yielded remarkable progress, broadly falling into three categories. First, memory-based methods mitigate the impact of delayed state transitions by augmenting the current state with historical trajectory information [ 2 ,3 , 4, 5, 6 ], but the complexity of the augmented state space grows substantially as the maximum delay in the environment increases. Second, prior-knowledge-based 

approaches leverage known constant delays or delay distributions to identify the effective actions that actually trigger state transitions [ 7, 8 ], yet rely on domain-specific priors that hinder generalization. Third, oracle-assisted methods rely on offline-collected non-delayed data, typically in the form of non-delayed expert demonstrations, to provide training guidance [ 9, 10 ]. However, their reliance on environment-specific oracles hinders generalization. Currently, there is no method that directly models the stochastic nature of environmental delays to truly equip the agent with the capacity for exploration in unknown environments. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) offers inherent robustness to delay effects. Goal-based HRL [ 11 ] abstracts control into high-level sub-goal selection and low-level execution, thereby mitigating the impact of low-level delays by reducing the decision frequency of the high-level policy, while option-based HRL [12 , 13 ] handles stochastic delays through learned option termination functions. However, these methods lack explicit modeling of fine-grained dynamics, limiting their ability to reason about delays in an interpretable way. Recent Causal HRL (CHRL) approaches [ 14 , 15 ] offer a more principled framework by uncovering latent causal hierarchies via structural causal models [ 16 ], enabling robust planning under delayed signals. However, they are constrained to fixed delays, making them less effective in real-world scenarios with stochastic delays. To tackle this challenges, we propose a novel approach named Delay-Empowered 

Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning ( DECHRL ), served as the pioneer framework in CHRL that is aware of stochastic delays. To be specific, our DECHRL consists of two key components: (1) A Causal Delay Distribution Modeling 

2Module , which jointly infers the underlying causal structure of the environment and the stochastic delay distribution directly from delayed observational data. This enables the agent to perceive and internalize the unknown delay characteristics of the environment, effectively endowing it with the ability to reason about when and how actions influence future states despite observation or action delays; (2) ADelay-Aware Empowerment Objective , which explicitly maximizes the agent’s causal influence over future states under delayed feedback. By quantifying the agent’s capacity to shape diverse and controllable outcomes in a delay-aware man-ner, this objective encourages proactive and effective exploration, thereby ensuring robust hierarchical decision-making even when interactions with the environment are temporally misaligned. Overall, DECHRL provides a principled approach to reinforcement learning under unknown, stochastic delays. It enables agents to learn effective and robust policies in environments where action effects are temporally misaligned and delay characteristics are unknown a priori. By jointly equipping agents with the ability to infer delay structures and to explore purpose-fully under uncertainty, DECHRL achieves adaptive policy learning in realistic delayed settings. To further enhance practical applicability, we also propose a 

Simplified-DECHRL variant that reduces computational overhead by adopting a coarse-grained delay representation. This version significantly improves scalability while incurring only minimal performance degradation. Overall, our contributions are summarized as follows: • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to integrate stochastic delay modeling into a CHRL framework, showcasing how causal hierar-chies inherently capture delayed temporal dependencies. This enables the agent to reason about when actions take effect under uncertainty and to align high-level decisions with temporally misaligned low-level outcomes, capabilities that are essential for robust policy learning in real-world delayed environments. • We propose DECHRL, a novel Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (CHRL) framework that explicitly integrates stochastic delay distribution modeling with a delay-aware empowerment objective. This dual design enables effective and robust policy learning in environments with temporally misaligned action effects and a priori unknown stochastic delays. • We empirically evaluate DECHRL on two structured, long-horizon bench-mark environments: modified 2D-Minecraft [ 17 ] and MiniGrid [ 18 ]. Both environments feature semantically rich, structured state representations 3(e.g., object-centric or grid-based symbolic observations) and involve dis-crete stochastic action delays —the regime for which our method is de-signed. Under these conditions, DECHRL maintains solid performance with maximum delays τmax ∈ { 4, 8} and across stochastic delay levels 

σdelay ∈ { 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}. Notably, the simplified variant, Simplified-DECHRL, demonstrates improved scalability: with a delay-modeling granu-larity of κ = 4 , it continues to perform well on the 2D-Minecraft task even when the maximum delay is increased to τmax = 30 . These results confirm that DECHRL is particularly well-suited to hierarchical decision-making problems where (i) delays are discrete and stochastic, and (ii) the environ-ment provides structured, interpretable states that enable causal discovery and meaningful temporal abstraction. In such settings, our framework reliably recovers delay patterns from delayed interaction data and aligns outcomes with their causal antecedents. The resulting delay-aware empowerment ob-jective then enables robust credit assignment under temporal misalignment, facilitating effective policy learning in long-horizon tasks with uncertain timing. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Delay-Aware Reinforcement Learning 

Significant progress has been made in Delay-Aware Reinforcement Learn-ing (DARL), with existing methods typically grouped into three categories: (1) Memory-based methods. These approaches enhance the current state with his-torical trajectory information [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 ] to mitigate the effects of delay. This can be done by either concatenating past K steps of observations and actions, or using a model to infer the current latent state [ 19 , 5 ]. However, these methods face scalability challenges due to the increasing state complexity caused by longer de-lays. (2) Prior knowledge-based methods. These methods leverage known delay information to identify the action responsible for a given outcome without the need to store full interaction histories. Examples include delay-aware Q-learning [ 7] and modified TD updates [ 8 ]. While efficient, these methods rely heavily on accurate prior knowledge of delays. (3) Oracle-assisted methods. These leverage expert demonstrations or non-delayed data to train or initialize policies. Methods like DRC-SAA [9] and DIDA [10] show improved performance, but require access to non-delayed data which may not be available in real-world settings. Memory-based methods augment the current state with past trajectories, prior knowledge-based methods assume known delays, while oracle-assisted approaches 4rely on non-delayed data. Our method, in contrast, learns from scratch under unknown stochastic delays, without prior knowledge or non-delayed data, enabling more practical and generalizable learning. 

2.2. Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning 

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) [ 20 ] decomposes complex tasks into manageable sub-tasks, with higher-level policies selecting subgoals and lower-level policies focusing on their execution. While HRL enhances efficiency through skill abstraction, it remains susceptible to delays in state transitions. Causal HRL (CHRL) extends this framework by learning hierarchical poli-cies that capture and utilize causal dependencies between actions and states, with potential to handle multi-step causal dependencies. Most Causal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (CHRL) methods adopt a common two-stage framework: (i) causal discovery , which identifies causal relationships or chains from interac-tion data, and (ii) hierarchical policy training , which maps the discovered causal structures to a set of skills or sub-goals, assigns a dedicated policy to each, and trains these policies to achieve their respective objectives. These steps are repeated until the full causal structure is uncovered. While sharing this core idea, methods vary in how they implement each stage. We classify them into four categories: 

(1) One-step causal chain. CEHRL [ 21 ] and CDHRL [ 15 ] learn one-step causal graphs using interventional or counterfactual data, but ignore multi-step delays. (2) Skill libraries from static graphs. SCALE [ 22 ], COInS [ 23 ], HCPI-HRL [ 24 ]convert static causal graphs into skill libraries, but rely on external supervision, human priors, or controlled environments. (3) Attention-based key-step graph. 

VACERL [ 25 ] uses attention to identify key observation–action pairs that pre-dict returns, forming a graph over critical steps, though assuming fixed delays. 

(4) Delay-aware graph. D3HRL [ 14 ] models multi-step causal effects using multi-timescale causal discovery and conditional independence tests, then builds a hierarchical controller on the resulting delay-aware graph. It performs well under fixed delays but assumes they are deterministic. Previous CHRL methods assume fixed delays, limiting their applicability to real-world stochastic latencies. Our approach models delay distributions for each causal relationship and integrates them into an empowerment-based objective, enabling more effective learning under delay uncertainty. 

2.3. Empowerment-Driven Exploration 

Empowerment is a task-agnostic intrinsic reward that measures an agent’s influence over its future, guiding it toward states with greater control—without 5external rewards. Empowerment-based methods can be grouped into the following categories: (1) Controllability-based. VIMIM [ 26 ] and VIC [ 27 ] maximize empowerment directly as an intrinsic reward to drive exploration. (2) Diversity-driven. DIYAN [ 28 ] and DADS [ 29 ] discover diverse and predictable skills using mutual information between latent skills and future states. (3) Latent planning and representation. IPE [ 30 ] and VGCRL [ 31 ] shape latent spaces to focus on controllable features. (4) Causal-aware. ECL [ 32 ] incorporates causal modeling into empowerment to improve interpretability. Most empowerment-based methods rely on explicit modeling of environment dynamics. In contrast, our approach leverages the causal dependencies discov-ered during the causal discovery phase as an abstract transition model, imposing structural constraints and offering semantic guidance for hierarchical policy design, thereby reducing the need for explicit dynamics modeling. 

3. Preliminaries 

Real-world dynamics often involve state transitions that vary in duration and may temporally overlap, yet remain non-interfering. Crucially, these transitions are not arbitrary; they conform to underlying causal principles. This motivates modeling them as temporally extended causal links spanning multiple timesteps, a formulation that is both principled and expressive. In this section, we first discuss how causal relationships can be represented and learned using neural networks (Section 3.1), and then we propose a new formalization of the model, tailored to the specific task we aim to solve, based on previous work in this area (Section 3.2). 

3.1. Structural Causal Model 

Structural Causal Model (SCM) [ 16 ] is a foundational framework for model-ing and reasoning about causal relationships among variables. It comprises two components: (1) a causal graph, typically a directed acyclic graph (DAG), that encodes causal edges; if C causes E, the graph includes a directed edge C → E,making C a parent of E, denoted PA (E); and (2) a set of generating functions that specify how each variable is produced from its parents together with an exogenous noise term, e.g., E = fE (PA (E), U E ).

The implementation of an SCM [ 33 ] with M effect variables {Si}Mi=1 and N

cause variables {Sj }Nj=1 comprises two components: • Causal Graph Adjacency Matrix η ∈ RM ×M : This matrix contains learn-able parameters that govern the edge probabilities in the causal graph. Specif-ically, for each pair of variables Si and Sj , the value σ(ηij ), where σ(·)

6denotes the sigmoid function, represents the probability that Si is a direct cause of Sj .The gradient with respect to the edge probability parameters η is typically estimated using a REINFORCE-style estimator [ 34 ]. Specifically, Ns causal graphs {Gn}Ns 

> n=1

are independently sampled as Gn ∼ Bernoulli (σ(η)) , and their fit to the data is evaluated via the negative log-likelihood L over K

batches of interventional data {Dk}Kk=1 . The resulting gradient estimator takes the form: 

∇ηEG∼p(G|η)

" KX

> k=1

L(G, D k)

#

≈ 1

NsNsX

> n=1

" KX

> k=1

L(Gn, D k) · ∇ η log p(Gn | η)

#

,

(1) where log p(Gn | η) denotes the log-probability of the sampled binary adjacency matrix Gn under the Bernoulli distribution parameterized by σ(η).• A Set of Generating Functions F = {f i(θ)}Mi=1 : Each predicts the logits of 

Si based on its parent variables in the sampled causal graph G:

bSi = f iθ(Si | XPA (Si;G)), (2) where PA (Si; G) denotes the set of parent variables of Si under the causal graph structure G, and θ represents the network parameters. Causal dependencies are typically modeled between successive time steps, under the assumption that the values of variables at time t − 1 directly influence those at time t. D3HRL [ 14 ] generalizes this paradigm by adopting a multi-timescale causal discovery approach, learning dependencies from the extended temporal window {t − τmax , t − τmax + 1 , . . . , t − 1} to time 

t. The generating function is then trained by optimizing the log-likelihood: 

max  

> θ

L(θ) = log softmax  f iθ

 Sit | PA (Si; G) . (3) To enable the generating function to better fit the effects under different values of a cause variable, we need to set the cause to different values and observe the corresponding effects. This operation of assigning different values to the cause variable is referred to as an intervention .73.2. Stochastic-Delay Causal Factored-SMDPs 

Motivated by SCM and Causal Factored-SMDPs [ 14 ], we introduce a new for-malization that captures causal structures governing state transitions with random delays within factored state and action spaces. Before presenting the formal model, we first state the standard causal assump-tions upon which our framework is built: • Acyclicity : The task hierarchy induces a forward progression of subgoals, as illustrated by the state transition dynamics in Figure 2. • Faithfulness [ 35 ]: State representations are sparse and functionally mod-ular—each sub-state (e.g., has_wood ) is determined by a small, explicit set of causes. This renders accidental cancellations among multiple causal pathways implausible, satisfying the faithfulness assumption in practice. • Independent Sub-State Transitions [36 ]: The global state decomposes into disjoint factors (e.g., agent position, inventory, object states), and each factor evolves independently given the action, consistent with factored MDP formulations. • Cause Precedes Effect [37 ]: Causal influences are strictly unidirectional in time: for all i̸ = j, Xjt does not cause Xit (no instantaneous causation), nor does it influence any past state Xit−τ for τ ≥ 1.• Causal Sufficiency [ 35 ]: All relevant causal variables are fully observed; there are no hidden confounders. Effects arise only when their explicitly modeled causes are jointly satisfied within a bounded temporal window. Complex dependencies such as path-dependent or cumulative triggers lie beyond the scope of this work. • Causal Markov Condition [35]: In the causal graph, each variable is inde-pendent of its non-descendants given its direct parents. This condition holds in our setting and aligns with the standard Markov property in reinforcement learning [1]. Our formal model is then defined as the tuple ⟨τmax , C, E, P, F, N⟩, where: • τmax : The maximum possible delay in the environment. • C (Cause Space) : The factored state space S = {S1 × S2 × · · · × SM } and the factored action space A = {A1 × A2 × · · · × AN } serve as causes. 8• E (Effect Space) : The factored state space S = {S1 × S2 × · · · × SM }

serves as effects. • P = {Pτ }τmax   

> τ=1

(Causal Relationship Matrices) : Each causal relationship matrix Pτ ∈ { 0, 1}M ×(M +N ) is a binary matrix that indicates which causes influence which effects after a delay of τ time steps. The entry Pτ [i][ j] equals 

1 if Sj is the cause of Si, and 0 otherwise. • F = {Fτ }τmax   

> τ=1

(Generating Functions) : A collection of generating functions that determine the value of each effect variable given its direct causes over delay τ .• N = {N (μi, σ 2 

> i

)}Mi=1 (Delay Distributions) : Each delay distribution N (μi, σ 2 

> i

)

defines the distribution of delays for causal relationships where Si is the effect. In practical problem-solving, for simplicity, we discretize the delay into positive integers τ that do not exceed the maximum delay τmax of the environment. The distribution N (μi, σ 2 

> i

) then specifies the probability of each discrete delay value τ . In our setup, the delays in all causal relationships corresponding to the same effect are consistent. 

4. Method 

This section introduces DECHRL, a CHRL framework that infers delay dis-tributions and causal dependencies to enhance delay-aware exploration efficiency in hierarchical policy learning. As illustrated in Figure 1, the overall algorithm proceeds in a progressive, iterative manner. In each round: (1) the agent employs the policies currently under its control to collect interventional data for multi-timescale causal discovery , modeling causal dependencies across heterogeneous temporal horizons; (2) it uses the discovered structure to estimate the correspond-ing causal delay distributions , enabling it to perceive and adapt to time-varying state-transition latencies; (3) based on the newly acquired causal knowledge, it 

instantiates a hierarchical policy architecture that reflects the current causal un-derstanding; and (4) it trains these policies with a delay-aware empowerment objective to exploit the learned delay structure for decision making. In the initial rounds, the only subgoals the agent can intervene on, i.e., the only ones under its control, are those in the primitive action space A, which we denote as the set 

List do = {A}. Consequently, the only policy under its control is the bottom-level policy πbottom , whose action space coincides with the primitive action space A.As iterations proceed, the agent progressively uncovers deeper causal chains and 9Figure 1: The overall framework of DECHRL. 

builds higher-level policies, thereby gaining control over an increasingly rich set of subgoals List do and enabling exploration of increasingly deeper causal structures. This cycle continues until the learned causal chain includes subgoals that directly accomplish the target task. 

4.1. Learning Causal Delay Distributions from Delayed Interactions 

Without modeling the distribution of delay effects, existing theories have informed the occurrence of bias during the state transition [ 9]. To fill this gap, we introduce a multi-timescale causal discovery approach to model the distribution of the delay variable, enabling the agent to capture temporal stochasticity. 

4.1.1. Multi-Timescale Causal Discovery 

Given a structured environment with M effect variables and N cause vari-ables, we adopt the multi-timescale causal discovery framework [ 14 ] to model multi-timescale causal relationships among variables. In each iteration, the agent performs the following procedure sequentially: 

Interventional Data Collection. In non-simulatable and fully unknown environ-ments, it is generally infeasible to perform ideal do -interventions—such as arbitrar-ily forcing state variables to desired values—as is commonly done in simulation. 10 Waiting for such interventions to occur naturally (i.e., for an intermediate variable to spontaneously attain a target value) would be prohibitively time-consuming. To accelerate this process, we leverage the current hierarchical policy to actively realize interventions with high success probability, thereby enabling efficient data collection for causal discovery. More specifically, by assigning a currently achiev-able subgoal Si ↑∈ List do (Si ↑ denotes increasing the value of sub-state Si) to the top-level policy πtop , the command is recursively propagated downward until the sub-policy πi responsible for accomplishing that subgoal is activated. Trained hier-archical policies can accomplish subgoals efficiently and with high success rates. Once a subgoal is achieved (interpreted as the intervention of a cause), we treat the post-intervention sub-state changes as candidate effects triggered by that cause. Aggregating such interventional data enables deeper exploring of the environment’s underlying causal structure, such as Si ↑→ Sj ↑, where Sj ↑ denotes the sub-states that increases as a result of the intervention of the cause. It is important to note that the changes observed in the sub-states following the trigger of a cause are not necessarily, or not entirely, its causal effects; whether a true causal relationship exists must be determined through SCM modeling below. Multi-Timescale SCM Modeling. The agent uses the collected interventional data to estimate the underlying set of {SCM τ }τmax   

> τ=1

across multiple timescales. To be specific, as shown in Figure 1.A, We define a set of processes {Pτ }τmax   

> τ=1

, each dedi-cated to learning an SCM τ for a specific delay τ , up to the maximum delay τmax 

(see Section 3.1 for details). For each effect variable Si (i ∈ { 1, . . . , M }), process 

Pτ learns the τ -lagged causal relationships {PA (Si) τ

−→ Si}Mi=1 , where PA (Si)

denotes the set of parent variables that directly influence Si. Each process Pτ yields a SCM τ consisting of a set of generating functions Fτ = {f iτ (Si | PA (Si)) }Mi=1 

and a causal graph matrix ητ ∈ RM ×N . The learned causal relationships are leveraged to model delay distributions (Section 4.1.2) and to construct the hier-archical policy framework (Section 4.2.1), while the learned generating function serves as a surrogate for the environment dynamics in evaluating the delay-aware empowerment objective (Section 4.2.2). 

4.1.2. Delay Distribution Modeling 

Building on the multi-timescale causal relationships learned above, we next model the corresponding delay distributions. To capture the stochastic temporal dynamics of causal effects, we first introduce a causal delay matrix β ∈ RM ×τmax ,where M denotes the number of effect variables in the environment and τmax 

represents the maximum delay horizon considered. Each element βi,τ is the logit of 11 the probability that the causal influence on effect variable Si manifests after a delay of τ steps. Applying the sigmoid transformation σ(·) yields the corresponding probability: 

σ(βi,τ ) = p(PA (Si) τ

−→ Si) ∈ (0 , 1) , X

> τ

σ(βi,τ ) = 1 . (4) Thus, each row σ(βi) defines a soft categorical distribution over possible delays for the causal edge PA (Si) → Si, characterizing its delay-specific strength. With the modeling of data-generation process introduced above, we then detail the learning procedure of the delay distributions below: 

Objective. During training, we generate K delay hypotheses H(k) by sampling from a Multinoulli distribution parameterized by softmax-normalized logits σ(β):

H(k) ∈ { 1, ..., τ max }M ×1 ∼ Multinoulli ( σ(β)) , k ∈ { 1, 2, ..., K }. (5) Our objective is to maximize the expected log-likelihood of the sampled hypotheses 

{H(k)}Kk=1 under the previous learned causal graph matrix {ητ }τmax   

> τ=1

:

max  

> β

EH,η

" X

> i

log σ(ηh(k) 

> i
> i

)

#

, (6) where L(k) 

> i

= log σ(ηh(k) 

> i
> i

) denotes the log-probability that the causal influence 

PA (Si) → Si occurs with delay h(k) 

> i

= H(k)[i].

Optimization. To reduce the variance, we employ the REINFORCE-style gradi-ent [34] to update the parameters of the causal delay matrix β:

∇βi EH∼Multinoulli( σ(βi)) 

h

L(k)

> i

i

≈ X

> k



σ(βi) − OneHot( h(k) 

> i

)

| {z }

> policy gradient

· w(k)

> i

|{z} 

> likelihood weight

,

(7) where w(k) 

> i

∝ exp( L(k) 

> i

) denotes the softmax-normalized likelihood weight evalu-ated over K hypotheses: 

w(k) 

> i

= exp( L(k) 

> i

)

P 

> k′

exp( L(k′) 

> i

), X

> k

w(k) 

> i

= 1 . (8) This gradient adjusts the delay distribution to assign higher probabilities to delays that are more consistent with the previous learned causal graph matrix {ητ }τmax   

> τ=1

.12 We also explored two alternative gradient estimators, PPO [ 38 ] and A2C [ 39 ], to update the parameter matrices of the delay distribution. We assessed their effect on the overall performance of DECHRL. The full experimental results and analysis can be found in Section 5.2.4. 

Regularization. To prevent degenerate solutions, we introduce the following regularization term: 

Lreg = −λ1

X

> i,τ

σ(βi,τ )(1 − σ(βi,τ )) + λ2

X

> i,τ

σ(βi,τ ), (9) where the first term encourages high entropy to avoid premature convergence, and the second encourages sparsity to highlight dominant delay choices. Although these two objectives may appear contradictory, their combination enables a balanced trade-off: with appropriately chosen hyperparameters, the model learns delay distributions that are both diverse enough to explore multiple temporal scales and 

sparse enough to identify the most relevant causal lags . We perform sensitivity analyses of λ1 and λ2 to characterize the hyperparameter regimes in which the algorithm exhibits robust performance, as detailed in Section 5.2.8. 

Algorithmic Procedure. As shown in Algorithm 1, each row of σ(β) forms a delay distribution for the corresponding causal edge until the convergence. We also provide a detailed analysis of the computational complexity of the delay distribution modeling in Appendix B. 

Algorithm 1 Delay Distribution Modeling  

> 1:

for each iteration do  

> 2:

for k = 1 to K do  

> 3:

Sample delay hypothesis H 

> 4:

Compute log-likelihoods L(k) 

> i

= log ηh(k) 

> i
> i
> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Compute weights w(k) 

> i

∝ exp( L(k) 

> i

) 

> 7:

Update βi,τ ← βi,τ + α ∇βi,τ Eh(k)

> i

[ Li ] − ∇ βi,τ Lreg 

 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Return learned delay distribution σ(β)

4.2. Delay-Aware Empowerment Objective for Hierarchical Policy Training 

Knowledge acquired in the preceding stage cannot be used directly for decision-making. Accordingly, we instantiate a hierarchical policy on top of the learned 13 causal structure and optimize it with a delay-aware empowerment objective con-structed from the learned distribution of delay effects, thereby guiding exploration toward actions with long-horizon influence. 

4.2.1. Hierarchical Policy Construction 

In this stage, we first construct the hierarchical framework grounded in the causal relationships learned in the preceding phase. Specifically, we define Ve as the set of sub-state variables that appear as effect nodes in the learned multi-timescale SCMs. For each effect variable Si ∈ V e, we treat its increase ( Si ↑) and decrease (Si ↓) as subgoals, governed by the dedicated policy πi. The sub-goals currently under training constitute a set defined as Ge = {Si ↑, S i ↓| Si ∈ V e}. We define a bottom-level policy πbottom that operates over primitive actions A to realize directly executable subgoals. For higher-level variables Sj , the corresponding subgoals (Sj ↑ and Sj ↓) must be achieved by recursively invoking policies across the hierarchy; accordingly, we expand the action space of the policies πj responsible for realizing these subgoals to: 

Ωj = A ∪ Sk ↑, S k ↓| Sk ∈ PA (Sj ) , (10) enabling recursive delegation to parent sub-goals. Additionally, a top-level policy 

πtop is introduced, with an action space spanning all trained sub-goals List do and ongoing sub-goals Ge:

Ωtop = List do ∪ G e. (11) The hierarchy is implemented using Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) [ 40 ], with each level of the policy sampling transition delays from the learned delay distribution σ(β) during experience collection. 

4.2.2. Delay-Aware Policy Optimization 

To enable the agent to effectively leverage the learned delay distribution for training hierarchical policies, we introduce a delay-aware empowerment objective. This encourages the high-level policy to explicitly account for temporal uncer-tainty in action effects, selecting sub-goals that exhibit strong causal influence and predictability across plausible delay scenarios. We next detail the training procedure for the hierarchical policies and begin by defining the notion of delay-aware empowerment as follows: 

Definition 1 (Delay-aware Empowerment) . Given the current full state St and a effect variable Si, the delay-aware empowerment E(Sit ) is defined as the expected 

14 conditional mutual information (CMI) between a sub-goal o ∈ Ωi and the delayed future effect variable Sit+τ , under a delay distribution matrix βi:

E(Sit ) = Eτ ∼Multinoulli( σ(βi)) 

I(Sit+τ ; o | St)

=

> τmax

X 

> τ=1

σ(βi,τ ) · H(Sit+τ | St) − H(Sit+τ | St, o ) ,

where I(· ; · | · ) denotes conditional mutual information, H(· | · ) denotes condi-tional entropy. 

Empowerment Estimation. The learned SCM captures causal effects among variables, allowing its generating functions to serve as surrogates for environment dynamics. More specifically, given a policy πi(·| St) over sub-goals o ∈ Ωi, the marginal future state distribution is computed as: 

p(Sit+τ | St) = X

> o∈Ωi

πi(o | St) · f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ). (12) Then the first entropy term is computed using the marginal distribution computed above: 

H(Sit+τ | St) = −E o∼Ωi  

> Sit+τ∼fiθ

log p(Sit+τ | St) , (13) whose maximization promotes diverse state transitions and broad exploration of the reachable state space. Meanwhile, the second entropy term is: 

H(Sit+τ | St, o ) = −ESit+τ ∼f iθ

log f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ) , (14) and minimizing it encourages the agent to select sub-goals that reduce uncertainty about delayed future outcomes, specifically those exhibiting strong and predictable causal influence despite temporal misalignment. 

Policy Gradient. To optimize the high-level policy, the estimated delay-aware empowerment serves an advantage signal to guide a REINFORCE-style gradient estimator [34]: 

∇ϕJ (i)

> emp

(ϕ) = Eo∼πi

h ˆE(Sit ) · ∇ ϕ log πi(o | St)

i

. (15) where ˆE(Sit ) denotes the estimated delay-aware empowerment at state St, com-puted via Monte Carlo estimation based on Eqs. (13) and (14), with log-sum-exp 15 smoothing and normalization to ensure training stability. Maximizing this objec-tive encourages the policy to select sub-goals with higher empowerment, thereby enhancing controllability and structured exploration. 

Algorithmic Procedure. We leave the full training procedure in Algorithm 2. The computational complexity of delay-aware empowerment–driven hierarchical policy training is analyzed in detail in Appendix C. 

Algorithm 2 Delay-Aware Policy Optimization  

> 1:

for each delay τ = 1 to τmax do  

> 2:

Sample sub-goal o ∼ πi(· | St) 

> 3:

Predict future effect state Sit+τ ∼ f iθ(· | St, o ) 

> 4:

Estimate marginal and conditional entropies using Eqs. (13) and (14)  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Estimate ˆE(Sit ) according to Definition 1  

> 7:

Update πi using REINFORCE with ˆE(Sit ) as advantage Hierarchical policies whose corresponding sub-goals achieve a success rate greater than 0.5 are considered successfully trained, and these sub-goals are added to the List do set for subsequent rounds of learning and training. We evaluate the robustness and sensitivity of the algorithm to the selection of this success-rate threshold in Section 5.2.9. 

4.3. Simplified-DECHRL 

Towards better scalability in realistic applications, our empirical findings show that hierarchical policies are robust to moderate delay variations. This indicates that while modeling each τ ∈ [1 , τ max ] individually is effective (as in our full framework), practical deployments can benefit from approximations such as coarse-grained delay bins that reduce computational overhead. Moreover, the multi-process architecture in our design, where each process performs independent causal discovery to identify a specific delay τ , incurs a computational cost that scales linearly with the maximum delay τmax , limiting both scalability and deployment feasibility. Thus, we subsample delays by a stride κ and retain only those divisible by κ, restricting the delay distribution to support only these values. The resulting variant is termed as Simplified-DECHRL , a variant designed to reduce resource usage while preserving performance. In Section 5.2.7, we evaluate the performance of Simplified-DECHRL under different delay-modeling granularities κ across various maximum environment delays. 16 We emphasize that scalability issues arise from memory-based methods, as their augmented state space grows with the delay horizon. Our DECHRL circumvents this issue at its source by modeling the delay distribution directly, eschewing state augmentation altogether. This not only eliminates the combinatorial explosion in state representation but also equips the agent with the ability to accurately infer the true delay distribution of state transitions in the environment. To further improve efficiency and scalability, we introduce Simplified-DECHRL, which substantially reduces the computational and representational costs of DECHRL while preserving its core functionality. 

5. Experiments and Analysis 

5.1. Environmental Setup 

Tasks. We evaluate on 2D-Minecraft [ 17 ] and MiniGrid [ 18 ], each with two designed tasks: GetSilverore (T1) and GetIron (T2) in 2D-Minecraft, and 

Fire2Burn (T3) and Wood2Wet (T4) in MiniGrid. Consider the GetIron task as an illustrative example: within a finite time budget, the agent must complete a multi-stage procedure—first collecting wood and stone, then crafting sticks, using them to build a stone axe, subsequently mining iron ore and coal, and ultimately smelting these resources into iron. All tasks in our experimental setting follow this paradigm of structured, long-horizon sequential decision-making. We introduce stochastic delays in state transitions, where each transition PA (Si) → Si is governed by a distinct delay distribution following N (μi, σ 2 

> i

). The mean μi is a pre-defined integer not exceeding τmax , while σi ∈ { 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} controls the level of delay variability. In the following, we use σdelay to represent the degree of stochasticity in state transitions. Figure 2 presents the state transitions involved in each task along with their predefined average delays. Figures 3 and 4 further illustrate, using the case of a maximum environment delay of τmax = 4 , the delay distributions of these state transitions under different levels of stochasticity 

σdelay . The agent has no access to this prior information and must automatically discover the delay structure through interaction. 

Metrics. We assess overall performance using two key metrics: Average Success Ratio (ASR) and Average Sub-goal Distance to Completion (ADC) ,both computed over the last 100 training episodes. To evaluate how accurately the model captures temporal dynamics, we measure the KL divergence between the learned and ground-truth delay distributions. All reported results are averaged across five random seeds. 17 (a) GetSilverore and GetIron    

> (b) Fire2Burn and Wood2Wet

Figure 2: State-transition dynamics and their average delay characteristics involved in the MineCraft and MiniGrid tasks ( τmax = 4 ). 

18 (a) σdelay = 0 .4

(b) σdelay = 0 .6

(c) σdelay = 0 .8

(d) σdelay = 1 .0

Figure 3: The delay distribution of transitions on the MineCraft tasks under different configuration of σdelay .

Figure 4: The delay distribution of transitions on the MiniGrid tasks under σdelay = 0 .4.

19 Baselines. We compare against representative DARL and HRL baselines under a unified hierarchical framework: (1) For DARL baselines, we exclude oracle-assisted approaches that bypass delay modeling, and instead integrate memory-based [6 ] and prior knowledge-based [7, 8] delay handling methods into the same HRL architecture as ours, ensuring fair comparison. (2) For HRL baselines, we enhance non-causal HRL baselines ( HAC [11 ], Option-Critic [12 ], LESSON [ 13 ]) with causal supervision via curriculum learning, enabling them to capture causal dependencies on par with CHRL baselines ( D3HRL [14 ], CDHRL [ 15 ]). All HRL baselines are further enhanced to handle a fixed uniform delay of τmax . We provide a detailed description of the enhancement methodology and present a comparative analysis of algorithmic performance before and after enhancement in Appendix A. 

5.2. Results and Analysis 

To systematically evaluate the proposed DECHRL framework, we design a series of experiments that address three key research questions: 1. Baselines Comparison – DARL: How does DECHRL compare with delay-aware RL (DARL) baselines? This comparison is used to evaluate the performance of different strategies for handling delays. 2. Baselines Comparison – HRL: How does DECHRL compare with standard HRL baselines? This comparison is used to evaluate the performance of different hierarchical reinforcement learning methods in environments with stochastic delays. 3. Delay Modeling Accuracy: How closely does the learned delay distribution match the ground-truth delay distribution? This evaluates the core capability of our causal delay modeling module to recover stochastic temporal dynamics from delayed observations. 4. Gradient Estimator Impact: How does the choice of gradient estimator for modeling the delay distribution affect DECHRL’s performance? This assesses the sensitivity and suitability of different gradient approximation strategies in delay distribution modeling. 5. Empowerment Ablation: How does the inclusion of the delay-aware em-powerment objective affect overall performance? This isolates the role of empowerment as a stabilizing exploration mechanism under delay-induced uncertainty. 20 6. Robustness to Delay Stochasticity: How does DECHRL perform under varying degrees of delay stochasticity? This tests the framework’s robustness to increasingly complex and uncertain delay structures. 7. Modeling Granularity & Scale: How does Simplified-DECHRL perform under different delay modeling granularities and maximum delays? This examines practical trade-offs in model capacity and scalability. 8. Hyperparameter Sensitivity: How sensitive is DECHRL to its hyperpa-rameters λ1 and λ2 (for delay modeling) and to the sub-goal success ratio threshold? This evaluates the ease of tuning and stability of the method in practice. 9. Sensitivity to Sub-Goal Success Criterion: How sensitive is DECHRL to the threshold used to determine sub-goal success? This evaluates the robustness of the hierarchical credit assignment mechanism to variations in the success criterion, which directly influences high-level policy learning and temporal abstraction quality. The subsequent subsections present empirical results corresponding to each ques-tion, providing a comprehensive evaluation of DECHRL’s practical effectiveness and algorithmic design. 

5.2.1. How does DECHRL compare with the DARL baselines? 

Experimental Design. We integrate the delay handling method of two foun-dational DARL categories into the same HRL architecture as ours: (1) Memory-Based : Augments states with historical trajectories during policy training; we term this variant State-Augmentation . (2) Prior Knowledge-Based : Leverages prior knowledge about delays for policy training. We implement two variants that differ only in their delay prior representation: (i) Prior-Fixed Delay : Applies a fixed, transition-specific delay μdelay ; (ii) Prior-Uniform Delay : Applies a uniform delay 

τmax to all transitions. To ensure a fair comparison, we implement Prior-Delay Dis-tribution , which incorporates the delay distribution learned by DECHRL as a prior into the same HRL architecture but omits the delay-aware empowerment bonus. We evaluate the sub-goal training efficiency of these variants on the GetSilverore 

task across τmax = {4, 8} and σdelay = {0.4, 0.8}, as shown in Figure 5. 

Experimental Results. State-Augmentation achieves moderate robustness but consistently underperforms our Prior-Delay Distribution . Prior-Uniform Delay 

degrades sharply with increasing τmax , while Prior-Fixed Delay suffers under high 21 Get Wood Get Stone Get Stick Get Stone Axe Get Silver Ore         

> τmax = 4
> σdelay = 0 .4
> τmax = 4
> σdelay = 0 .8
> τmax = 8
> σdelay = 0 .4
> τmax = 8
> σdelay = 0 .8

Figure 5: The sub-goal training efficiency of different delay-handling methods across varying delay settings on the GetSilverore task. 

σdelay due to unmodeled uncertainty. In contrast, our Prior-Delay Distribution ,leveraging the learned delay distribution—consistently outperforms all baselines across all settings, demonstrating superior robustness. Notably , within the unified HRL framework without Delay-Aware Empowerment, ablating the delay distri-bution modeling module reduces the algorithm to using fixed delays, learned via causal discovery, as priors for policy training. Thus, the comparison between 

Prior-Delay Distribution and Prior-Fixed Delay serves as an ablation study on modeling the delay distribution, rendering a separate evaluation unnecessary. 

How does DECHRL compare with the HRL baselines? 

5.2.2. How does DECHRL compare with the HRL baselines? 

Experimental Design. We evaluate the overall performance of DECHRL and the enhanced HRL baselines (prefixed “ Enh. ”) across all tasks under τmax ∈ { 4, 8}

and σdelay ∈ { 0.4, 0.8}, with the results summarized in Figure 6. 

Experimental Results. Our DECHRL demonstrates strong performance across tasks by effectively modeling delayed effects and enabling proactive, delay-aware empowerment-driven exploration. Although it slightly trails CDHRL on the Get-Iron task ( τmax = 4 , σ delay = 0 .4) in Figure 6(b), it outperforms baselines as delay 22 (a) T1 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .4) (b) T2 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .4) (c) T3 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .4) 

(d) T1 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .8) (e) T2 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .8) (f) T3 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .4) 

(g) T1 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .4) (h) T2 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .4) (i) T4 (τmax =4 , σ delay =0 .4) 

(j) T1 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .8) (k) T2 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .8) (l) T4 (τmax =8 , σ delay =0 .4) 

Figure 6: The ASR and ADC of DECHRL and enhanced HRL baselines across four tasks under varying settings. 

23 stochasticity σdelay and maximum delay τmax increase, highlighting its robustness in handling complex, uncertain delay dynamics. D3HRL relies on accurate delay estimation. Under low σdelay , delays are more predictable, allowing its fixed-delay model to perform well. However, as σdelay increases, it becomes harder to align transitions with true delays, leading to reduced performance and weaker robust-ness. Enh.CDHRL can perceive fixed delays, but exhibits limited sensitivity to the maximum delay τmax : performance is strong at τmax = 4 but degrades for 

τmax = 8 . This limitation arises because it cannot accurately model variable delay distributions—larger τmax increases perceptual bias, hindering hierarchical policy learning. Enh.HAC incorporates curriculum learning and causal supervision, but does not support stochastic delay modeling or intrinsic motivation. Consequently, it performs adequately on simpler tasks like Fire2Burn (T3) and Wood2Wet (T4) but deteriorates on more complex ones such as GetSilverore (T1) and GetIron (T2). 

Enh.Option-Critic and Enh.LESSON lack multi-level hierarchical structures. De-spite being guided via curriculum learning, their flat architectures struggle to retain prior knowledge across subgoal levels. Consequently, their performance remains poor across all tasks. Notably, Option-Critic slightly outperforms LESSON due to its inherent option-based temporal abstraction. We note that HAC, Option-Critic, and LESSON struggle to match the performance of other methods even under the relatively easy setting ( σdelay = 0 .4). Consequently, we omit these algorithms from evaluation under the more challenging condition ( σdelay = 0 .8). Among the various baselines, CDHRL and D3HRL are the two baselines most closely related to our work. Accordingly, we provide a detailed comparison of CDHRL, D3HRL, and our proposed DECHRL in Appendix D, with a focus on implementation details and computational complexity. 5.2.3. How closely does the learned delay distribution match the ground-truth delay distribution? 

Experimental Design. We evaluate DECHRL on the GetSilverore task under varying degrees of delay stochasticity σdelay = {0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}, with a maxi-mum delay of τmax = 4 . Specifically, we compute the KL divergence between the delay distributions learned by DECHRL for each state transition and their corresponding ground-truth distributions. The results reported are averaged over 5 independent runs and presented in Table 1. 

Experimental Results. For the majority of state transitions, the KL divergence between the delay distributions learned by DECHRL and the true distributions remains below 0.5, indicating that, despite minor discrepancies, their core structures are well aligned. For a small subset of transitions, however, noticeable deviations 24 σdelay 

Transitions A

> ↓

wood 

A

> ↓

stone wood 

> ↓

stick stone, stick 

> ↓

stonepickaxe stonepickaxe 

> ↓

silverore σdelay = 0 .4 0.0354 0.0217 0.0449 0.7876 0.0825 

σdelay = 0 .6 0.4051 0.0963 0.5748 0.2656 0.1293 

σdelay = 0 .8 0.3085 0.2431 0.9108 0.6557 0.1638 

σdelay = 1 .0 0.1697 0.4960 0.6287 0.2961 2.0625 

Table 1: KL divergence between the true and learned delay distributions on the GetSilverore 

(τmax = 4 ) task under varying levels of delay stochasticity σdelay ∈ { 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}.

are observed. As the stochasticity σdelay of state transitions in the environment increases, the discrepancy between the learned and ground-truth delay distributions exhibits a growing trend. Overall, our proposed delay modeling module effectively captures the underlying delay distributions of environmental state transitions. In conjunction with the experimental results presented in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, this demonstrates that the learned delay distributions enable the agent to perceive temporal delays in the environment and thereby facilitate robust decision-making under delayed feedback. 

5.2.4. How does the choice of gradient estimators method for modeling the delay distribution affect the performance of DECHRL? 

Experimental Design. We implement delay distribution modeling using three different gradient estimators (REINFORCE [ 34 ], PPO [ 38 ], and A2C [ 39 ]), and then compare the performance of DECHRL when trained with the delay distribu-tions obtained from each of these estimators. The results are shown in Figure 7. 

Figure 7: DECHRL’s performance on the GetSilverore (τmax = 4 ) tasks with varying gradient estimators (REINFORCE, PPO, A2C). 

Experimental Results. The performance of all three gradient estimators is 25 comparable, with differences primarily observed in the early stages of training. Specifically, in the early stages of training, REINFORCE quickly improved the success rate, demonstrating faster convergence due to its large gradient updates. As training progressed, both PPO and A2C slightly outperformed REINFORCE in convergence speed. This suggests that PPO and A2C offer better stability than REINFORCE, despite their slower initial convergence. Thereofre, REINFORCE achieves faster improvement in success rate during the early stages of training, whereas PPO and A2C exhibit more stable long-term performance and avoid pre-mature convergence to suboptimal solutions. Each of these gradient estimators effectively models the delay distribution, consistently achieving a 100% task suc-cess rate with only minor variations in convergence speed. Among these strong alternatives, we select REINFORCE for its simplicity and computational efficiency, which facilitate rapid initial exploration while maintaining low overhead. 

5.2.5. How does the inclusion of the delay-aware empowerment objective affect overall performance? 

Experimental Design. We implement DECHRL/Emp , a variant of DECHRL 

that removes the delay-aware empowerment bonus. We evaluate the sub-goal policy training efficiency of DECHRL/Emp and DECHRL on the GetSilverore task (τmax = 4 , σdelay = 0 .4), with the results presented in Table 2. Variants Sub-goals Get Wood Get Stone Get Stick Get Stone Axe Get Silver Ore DECHRL 1.00 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 0.99 ± 0.01 0.99 ± 0.01 0.99 ± 0.01           

> DECHRL/Emp 0.98 ± 0.02 0.99 ± 0.01 0.98 ± 0.11 0.83 ± 0.17 0.93 ± 0.26
> Table 2: With vs. Without Empowerment: Sub-goal Efficiency on the GetSilverore
> (τmax = 4 ,σdelay = 0 .4) task.

Experimental Results. DECHRL outperforms its ablated variant in training efficiency across all subgoals. The strategies trained with the delay-aware empow-erment objective are clearly more effective in ensuring thorough exploration of the subgoals in the environment, leading to faster and better performance. 

5.2.6. How does DECHRL perform under varying degrees of delay stochasticity? 

Experimental Design. We evaluated DECHRL on the GetSilverore task under four levels of stochastic delay, with σdelay ∈ { 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}. The corresponding delay distributions for these four levels of stochastic delay are illustrated in Figure 3. The results are presented in Figure 8. 26 Figure 8: DECHRL’s performance on the GetSilverore (τmax = 4 ) tasks with varying      

> σdelay ={0.4,0.6,0.8,1.0}.

Experimental Results. Increasing σdelay leads to greater uncertainty in state transition delays, posing challenges not only for delay detection but also for effective adaptation. Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 8, DECHRL maintains consistently strong performance across all delay settings, highlighting its robustness and generalization under varying levels of temporal uncertainty. 

5.2.7. How does Simplified-DECHRL perform under different delay modeling granularities and maximum delays? 

Experimental Design. We evaluate the overall performance of Simplified-DECHRL on the GetSilverore task under different delay modeling granularities 

κ ∈ { 2, 4, 6, 8} and maximum environment delays τmax ∈ { 8, 12 , 16 , 24 , 30 }, with the results shown in Figure 9. 

Experimental Results. We first analyze how the choice of delay-modeling granularity κ affects both performance and computational cost. A finer granularity (κ = 2 ) enables more accurate modeling of the delay distribution and thus better preserves the overall algorithmic performance. However, it incurs substantial process overhead; for instance, when the maximum delay is τmax = 24 , modeling delays with κ = 2 requires 12 parallel processes, whereas using a coarser gran-ularity of κ = 4 reduces this number to only 6. At the other extreme, a coarser granularity ( κ = 8 ) greatly reduces the process cost, but the resulting delay model is overly coarse and leads to a noticeable drop in performance. Intermediate granu-larities κ ∈ { 4, 6} offer a good trade-off between performance and computational overhead, with the finer granularity ( κ = 4 ) achieving marginally superior results compared to κ = 6 . In general, the choice of κ should be tailored to the specific task; in the environments considered in this work, κ = 4 proved to be the most suitable. Having fixed a reasonable delay-modeling granularity ( κ = 4 ), we next examine the impact of the maximum delay τmax on algorithm performance. Fig-27 (a) κ = 2 (b) κ = 4                    

> (c) κ= 6 (d) κ= 8
> Figure 9: The ASR and ADC of Simplified-DECHRL on the GetSilverore task under different maximum delays τmax ∈ { 8,12 ,16 ,24 ,30 }with modeling granularities κ∈{2,4,6,8}.

ure 9(b) shows that as τmax increases, both the convergence speed and the final performance exhibit a slight decline; nevertheless, even at τmax = 24 , the algo-rithm still maintains strong performance. Although the simplified variant incurs a modest loss in performance, it substantially improves scalability by reducing computational cost. Given the considerable savings in computational resources, this trade-off is both acceptable and practically worthwhile. 

5.2.8. How sensitive is DECHRL to its hyperparameters λ1 and λ2 during delay distribution modeling? 

Experimental Design. To systematically assess the impact of hyperparameter variations on DECHRL’s performance, we evaluated it on the GetSilverore (τmax =4, σ delay = 0 .8) task across a range of values spanning multiple orders of magnitude: 

{0.01 , 0.1, 1, 10 }, with the results shown in Figure 10. 

Experimental Results. DECHRL exhibits robust performance and consistent, rapid convergence when both λ1 and λ2 are set between 0.01 and 0.1. Setting λ1 to 

1 also yields rapid convergence, whereas increasing λ2 to 1 causes a substantial slowdown in convergence. When either λ1 or λ2 is set to 10 , the convergence rate drops drastically. Despite these variations in convergence speed, DECHRL consistently reaches a success rate close to 100% across all hyperparameter settings. 28 Figure 10: DECHRL’s performance on the GetSilverore (τmax = 4 , σ delay = 0 .8) task with varying values of hyperparameters λ1, λ 2.

Based on these observations, we set both λ1 and λ2 to 0.05 , which lies near the midpoint of the effective range ( 0.01 ∼ 0.1). We would like to emphasize that the 

brown and red curves only begin to produce meaningful results after approximately 25k training episodes. This delay is due to their highly imbalanced hyperparameter settings: (λ1, λ 2) = (0 .1, 10) for the brown variant and (λ1, λ 2) = (10 , 0.1) for the red variant. These extreme configurations impede the reliable estimation of causal structures and delay distributions, consequently delaying the onset of hierarchical policy training. As a result, these variants require substantially more interaction data before they can complete the causal discovery stage and transition into hierarchical policy training. 

5.2.9. How sensitive is DECHRL to its sub-goal success ratio threshold? 

Experimental Design. We evaluate the performance of our DECHRL on the 

GetSilverore (τmax = 4 , σ delay = 0 .4) task under various subgoal success-rate thresholds to assess their influence, with the results presented in Figure 11.     

> Figure 11: DECHRL’s performance on the GetSilverore (τmax = 4 , σ delay = 0 .4) task with varying values of subgoal success ratio threshold.

Experimental Results. The achievement of higher-level subgoals relies on the reliable execution of lower-level subgoals. If the success-rate threshold is set 29 too low, it can undermine the accomplishment of higher-level subgoals. On the other hand, setting the threshold too high can present challenges, as higher-level subgoals are inherently more difficult to train. Achieving a very high success rate within a limited timeframe can be somewhat challenging, and failure to meet the threshold within the allotted time can hinder subsequent learning, slowing the overall convergence of the algorithm. To strike a balance between robust subgoal execution and efficient convergence, we choose a success-rate threshold of 0.5 for subgoal training. 

6. Conclusion 

Existing delay-aware RL methods typically address delays by augmenting the state space, incorporating prior knowledge of delay distributions, or relying on non-delayed data. These strategies often suffer from limited scalability and poor generalization. While HRL is inherently suited to handling delays, current methods are restricted to fixed-delay settings. To overcome these limitations, we propose DECHRL, which leverages multi-timescale causal discovery to model delay distributions and integrates them into a delay-aware empowerment objective. This allows agents to infer delay dynamics internally and explore more effectively, enabling efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. We further propose a sim-plified variant to enhance scalability with minimal compromise in performance. Currently, our approach is limited to tasks with discrete, semantically structured state spaces. Extending DECHRL to continuous or high-dimensional observations, such as pixel-based inputs, is a promising direction for future work toward broader applicability in complex, realistic environments. 

Appendix A. Enhancement of Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning Base-lines 

Appendix A.1. Enhancement Methodology 

To ensure a fair comparison, we enhance the baseline hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) algorithms along two key dimensions: 

Enhancing Delay Handling Capability . Among the hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) baselines, only D3HRL explicitly models transition-specific fixed delays, and the option-based methods (Option-Critic and LESSON) implicitly handle variable delays through their termination functions. In contrast, CDHRL and HAC lack any intrinsic mechanism to cope with action-effect delays. To ensure 30 a fair comparison, we equip these two methods with the ability to operate under a fixed delay horizon τmax . Specifically, for CDHRL, we modify both its causal discovery and policy training phases: during intervention data collection for causal structure learning, we enforce a temporal offset of exactly τmax steps between actions and their observed effects; the same offset is applied when gathering transition data for hierarchical policy updates. This allows CDHRL to correctly infer and learn from τmax -step delayed dependencies. Similarly, for HAC, we align its experience collection process with the τmax -step delay by sampling transitions at this fixed interval during policy training, enabling it to adapt its subgoal generation and low-level control to the delayed feedback. 

Enhancing Causal Awareness . D3HRL, CDHRL, and our DECHRL are capable of autonomously discovering causal relationships from interaction data—a key enabler for iterative environment exploration and dynamic construction of hier-archical policies. The remaining baselines (HAC, LESSON, and Option-Critic), however, have no built-in causal reasoning mechanism. Comparing them directly would therefore be unfair, as they cannot acquire the structural knowledge that informs effective subgoal decomposition. To ensure a fair comparison, we provide all non-causal baselines with ground-truth causal information through a structured curriculum. Rather than discovering dependencies from scratch, these methods are guided to learn subgoals in a staged, bottom-up fashion: training begins with the most immediate, low-level subgoals, and only after mastery is demonstrated do we introduce higher-level objectives that depend on previously learned ones. This curriculum applies uniformly across architectures—whether multi-level (as in HAC) or flat option-based frameworks (as in LESSON and Option-Critic). For the latter, although they lack explicit hierarchical layers, we still sequence their training by gradually expanding the set of achievable subgoals, effectively simulating depth through curriculum progression. In this way, all baselines operate with equivalent causal priors. 

Appendix A.2. Empirical Analysis of Enhancements 

Experimental Design . To assess the impact of the proposed enhancements, we conducted an evaluation of the unenhanced baseline algorithms on the GetSilverore 

(τmax = 4 , σ delay = 0 .4) task, as illustrated in Figure A.12. 

Experimental Results . A comparison between the pre-enhancement results in Figure A.12 and the post-enhancement results in Figure 6(a) demonstrates the effectiveness of our enhancement approach, although its impact varies considerably 31 (a) ASR (b) ADC     

> Figure A.12: The performance of the unenhanced baselines on the GetSilverore (τmax =4, σ delay = 0 .4) task.

across different algorithms. Among them, CDHRL , which is closely related to our method within the CHRL framework, exhibits the most pronounced improvement. Originally limited to handling only single-step state transitions or fixed single-step delays, CDHRL gains the ability to perceive delays up to τmax steps after our en-hancement. This newfound capability naturally leads to a substantial performance boost. HAC , which employs a hierarchical multi-level architecture, also achieves notable gains following the integration of delay-awareness and causal-awareness mechanisms. However, because each policy in HAC is responsible for managing all subgoals at its corresponding level and these subgoals inherently exhibit varying delays, it becomes challenging to successfully train all subgoals simultaneously within the same hierarchy. This inconsistency hampers the learning of higher-level subgoals and ultimately constrains overall performance. In contrast, both LES-SON and Option-Critic show virtually no improvement in terms of ASR, which remains close to zero even after enhancement. Nevertheless, their ADC metrics indicate that the enhanced versions are indeed capable of exploring deeper causal chains. The limited performance gain and minimal before-after difference can be attributed to their lack of a hierarchical structure, which prevents them from retaining previously learned subgoals during curriculum learning. This is a critical limitation that severely undermines their overall efficacy. 

Appendix B. Computational Complexity of Delay Distribution Modeling 

The delay distribution modeling component of DECHRL employs the RE-INFORCE algorithm to learn the delay matrix parameters H, where each effect variable Si has a delay distribution over τmax possible time steps. We summa-rize all parameters appearing in the computational cost analysis, along with their 32 definitions, in Table B.3. Symbol Description 

M Number of variables 

τmax Maximum action-effect delay horizon considered 

I Number of outer training iterations 

K Number of samples collected per iteration 

|List do | Number of do-intervention variables 

Table B.3: Notation used in computational cost analysis. 

Appendix B.1. Computational Complexity Analysis 

The REINFORCE training loop consists of two main computation phases: 

Cdelay =

> I

X

> i=1
> K

X

> k=1
> |List do |

X

> j=1

Csampling_accum (M, τ max )

| {z }

> Configuration Sampling & Accumulation

+

> I

X

> i=1

Cgradient (K, |List do |, M, τ max )

| {z }

> REINFORCE Gradient Computation

(B.1) where Csampling_accum represents the per-sample computation within the triple nested loop, and Cgradient represents the batch gradient computation performed at the end of each outer iteration. The computational complexity of each is given below: (1) Configuration Sampling & Accumulation (within triple loop): 

Csampling_accum (M, τ max ) = O(Configuration Sampling )+ O(Probability Normalization )+ O(Gradient Accumulation )

(B.2) Breaking down the accumulation: 

O(Configuration Sampling ) = O(M × τmax ) (B.3) 

O(Probability Normalization ) = O(M × τmax ) (B.4) 

O(Gradient Accumulation ) = O(M × τmax ) (B.5) 

Csampling_accum = O(M × τmax ) (B.6) (2) REINFORCE Gradient Computation (per outer iteration): 

Cgradient (K, |List do |, M, τ max ) = O(|List do | × K × M × τmax ) (B.7) 33 Thus, the overall computational complexity is: 

Cdelay = I × K × | List do | × O (M × τmax )

| {z }

> Sampling & Accumulation Phase

+ I × O (|List do | × K × M × τmax )

| {z }

> Gradient Computation Phase

= O(I × K × | List do | × M × τmax )

(B.8) 

Appendix B.2. Space Complexity Analysis 

The space complexity of the delay distribution modeling consists of two main components with different memory lifetimes: 

Sdelay =

> I

X

> i=1

Saccumulation (K, |List do |, M, τ max )

| {z }

> Gradient Accumulation Phase

+ Spermanent (M, τ max )

| {z }

> Permanent Storage Phase

, (B.9) where Saccumulation represents temporary memory used during gradient accumulation and Spermanent represents persistent memory for network parameters. The space complexity of each is given below: (1) Gradient Accumulation Storage: 

Saccumulation (K, |List do |, M, τ max ) = O(|List do | × K × M × τmax ) (B.10) This phase stores the accumulated gradient terms and logregret values during each outer iteration, where K × | List do | samples of size M × τmax are accumulated before gradient computation. (2) Permanent Parameter Matrix Storage: 

Spermanent (M, τ max ) = O(M 2 + M × τmax ) (B.11) This phase includes the delay parameter matrix H of size (M, τ max ) and the causal relationship parameter matrix of size (M, M ), which persist throughout training. Thus, the overall space complexity is: 

Sdelay = O(|List do | × K × M × τmax ) + O(M 2 + M × τmax )= O(M 2 + |List do | × K × M × τmax ) (B.12) 

Summary . Overall, the delay distribution modeling component exhibits low computational and space complexity, consuming minimal resources and com-pleting in negligible time during each training iteration. 

34 Appendix C. Computational Complexity Analysis of Delay-Aware Empowerment-Driven Hierarchical Policy Training 

The delay-aware empowerment estimation component computes a Monte Carlo approximation of the conditional mutual information (CMI) I(Sit+τ ; o | St) for each effect variable Si and delay horizon τ ∈ { 1, . . . , τ max }, as defined in Defini-tion 1. Under the practical setting where the high-level policy πi(o | St) is used to marginalize over sub-goals o ∈ Ωi, and the structural causal model (SCM) provides the surrogate transition function f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ), the empowerment estimator pro-ceeds by: (i) enumerating all valid sub-goals to compute the marginal distribution 

p(Sit+τ | St) = P 

> o

πi(o | St)f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ) for entropy H(Sit+τ | St), and (ii) using the executed sub-goal o to evaluate the conditional entropy H(Sit+τ | St, o )

via f iθ. We summarize all parameters appearing in the computational cost analysis in Table C.4. Symbol Description                   

> BBatch size (number of full-state samples Stprocessed)
> τmax Maximum action-effect delay horizon considered
> ACardinality of the sub-goal space Ωi(typically 2, up to 7 for top-level policy in our setup)
> VCardinality of the discrete effect variable Si(typically 2 in our setup)
> NτNumber of samples in the batch with delay step τ, where Pτmax
> τ=1 Nτ=B

Table C.4: Notation used in computational cost analysis of delay-aware empowerment. 

Appendix C.1. Computational Complexity Analysis 

The empowerment computation consists of two main phases executed for each delay step τ :

Cemp =

> τmax

X 

> τ=1

Cmarginal (Nτ , A, V )

| {z }

> Marginal Entropy Estimation

+

> τmax

X 

> τ=1

Cconditional (Nτ , V )

| {z }

> Conditional Entropy Estimation

(C.1) where Cmarginal captures the cost of computing H(Sit+τ | St) via sub-goal enumera-tion (Eq. (13) ), and Cconditional captures the cost of computing H(Sit+τ | St, o ) using the sampled sub-goal o (Eq. (14) ). The computational complexity of each phase is detailed below. 35 (1) Marginal Entropy Estimation (per τ ): 

Cmarginal (Nτ , A, V ) = O(Policy Evaluation )+ O(SCM Transition Enumeration )+ O(Marginal Log-Probability Aggregation )

(C.2) Breaking down the components: 

O(Policy Evaluation ) = O(Nτ A) (C.3) 

O(SCM Transition Enumeration ) = O(A · Nτ V ) (C.4) 

O(Marginal Log-Probability Aggregation ) = O(Nτ AV ) (C.5) 

Cmarginal (Nτ , A, V ) = O(AN τ V ) (C.6) (2) Conditional Entropy Estimation (per τ ): 

Cconditional (Nτ , V ) = O(Nτ V ) (C.7) This corresponds to evaluating f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ) for the executed sub-goal o and computing the log-probability for entropy estimation (Eq. (14)). Summing over all τ and using Pτmax   

> τ=1

Nτ = B, the total computational com-plexity becomes: 

Cemp =

> τmax

X 

> τ=1

[O(AN τ V ) + O(Nτ V )] + O(τmax B)

| {z }

> group filtering overhead

= O(AV B ) + O(V B ) + O(τmax B)= O(AV B + τmax B)

(C.8) 

Appendix C.2. Space Complexity Analysis 

The space complexity arises primarily from storing intermediate SCM outputs during marginal entropy computation: 

Semp = max  

> τ

Stemp (Nτ , A, V )

| {z }

> Peak Temporary Storage

+ Soutput (B)

| {z }

> Empowerment Estimates

(C.9) (1) Peak Temporary Storage (for a given τ ): 

Stemp (Nτ , A, V ) = O(AN τ V ) (C.10) 36 This is required to hold all A SCM output distributions f iθ(Sit+τ | St, o ) of shape 

(Nτ , V ) simultaneously before computing the marginal p(Sit+τ | St). In the worst case ( Nτ = B), this yields O(ABV ) memory. (2) Output Storage: 

Soutput (B) = O(B) (C.11) for the final empowerment estimates ˆE(Sit ) used in the REINFORCE gradient. Thus, the overall space complexity is: 

Semp = O(ABV ) + O(B)= O(ABV ) (C.12) 

Summary . Given the small sub-goal space and binary effect variables in our setup, the delay-aware empowerment estimation incurs only linear computa-tional and memory overhead with respect to the batch size, making it highly efficient in practice. Appendix D. A Comparative Analysis of Implementation, Complexity in DECHRL, D3HRL, and CDHRL 

Considering that the implementation frameworks of HRL and DARL baseline algorithms differ significantly from that of CHRL algorithms, we focus our com-parison on CHRL-based baseline algorithms that share a similar framework with the work presented in this paper. This includes a comparison of implementation details as well as an analysis of computational complexity. 

Appendix D.1. Comparison of Implementation Details 

We begin by outlining the implementation details of the three algorithms (CDHRL, D3HRL and our DECHRL). Our analysis focuses on the two main phases of the CHRL framework, namely causal discovery and hierarchical policy training, as described in Section 2.2. 

Appendix D.1.1. CDHRL: Baseline Framework 

CDHRL serves as the foundational framework that implements single-step causal relationship learning and hierarchical policy construction. It learns one-step causal transitions using Structural Causal Models (SCM) and builds hierarchical strategies based on the discovered causal structure. For each hierarchical level, CDHRL establishes a unified policy that handles all subgoals at the same level, with each policy relying on single-step state transitions learned through causal 37 intervention experiments. The computational complexity remains relatively low since it only processes single-step transitions without additional overhead from delay modeling or spurious correlation detection. 

Appendix D.1.2. D3HRL: Multi-Temporal Causal Discovery with Spurious Corre-lation Detection 

D3HRL extends CDHRL’s single-step causal learning to multi-temporal causal relationship discovery by utilizing τmax parallel processes, each focusing on differ-ent temporal horizons. This extension inherently increases the computational com-plexity of causal discovery by approximately a factor of τmax compared to CDHRL. Furthermore, D3HRL incorporates Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) net-works to detect and filter spurious correlations, representing a substantial additional computational burden. The CMI-based detection involves multiple rounds of neural network training and is relatively complex, incurring additional computational cost. In the hierarchical policy training phase, D3HRL establishes independent policies for each subgoal and collects transition data based on the learned delay lengths, using standard HRL objectives without empowerment mechanisms. 

Appendix D.1.3. DECHRL: Delay Distribution Modeling with Empowerment-Driven Policy Training 

DECHRL builds upon both frameworks by implementing delay distribution modeling through REINFORCE-based learning of probability distributions over possible temporal delays. Unlike D3HRL’s computationally expensive CMI net-works, DECHRL’s delay modeling employs a lightweight REINFORCE approach (please refer to Appendix B for details). This efficiency stems from the fact that delay modeling operates on small parameter matrices and requires no complex neural network forward-backward passes. In the hierarchical policy training phase, DECHRL also establishes independent policies for each subgoal but enhances exploration through delay-aware empowerment. This intrinsic motivation pro-vides more efficient exploration and goal generation compared to both CDHRL’s single-step approach and D3HRL’s discrete multi-step framework. 

Summary . The implementation details of the three algorithms in these two phases are summarized in Table D.5. 

Appendix D.2. Computational Complexity Analysis 

Based on the detailed implementation analysis of each algorithm in Section Ap-pendix D.1, the computational complexity of the three methods across the two training stages can be summarized as follows: 38 Causal Discovery Hierarchical Policy Training       

> CDHRL Uses the current hierarchical policy to col-lect intervention data for learning single-step causal relationships. Learns hierarchical policies using single-step state transitions, with each policy responsible for training all sub-goals at the same depth. D3HRL Uses the current hierarchical policy to col-lect intervention data for learning multi-timescale causal relationships, and em-ploys spurious correlation detection to iden-tify transition-specific/causal relationship-specific fixed delays. Uses the learned transition-specific de-lays to collect transition data for hierar-chical policy training, with a separate policy for each sub-goal. DECHRL Uses the current hierarchical policy to col-lect intervention data for learning multi-timescale causal relationships, and models delay distributions corresponding to each state transition/causal relationship. Uses the learned transition-specific de-lay distributions to collect transition data for hierarchical policy training, with a separate policy for each sub-goal.

Table D.5: A Comparative Analysis of CDHRL, D3HRL, and DECHRL Implementations. 

• Causal discovery stage. CDHRL learns only single-step causal relation-ships. In contrast, both D3HRL and DECHRL adopt a multi-timescale approach to learn causal dependencies across delays from 1 to τmax steps. Additionally, D3HRL incorporates an extra module for spurious correla-tion detection, while DECHRL introduces a dedicated delay distribution modeling component. • Hierarchical policy training stage. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), the GetSil-verOre task involves a causal chain of depth 4 and 5 intermediate subgoals. Building on our analysis in the previous section, CDHRL employs a number of hierarchical policies equal to the causal chain depth (4), with each policy jointly trained to handle all subgoals at its corresponding level. In contrast, both D3HRL and DECHRL allocate one policy per intermediate subgoal, resulting in a total of 5 hierarchical policies, each trained independently for a specific subgoal. Furthermore, the hierarchical policies in DECHRL are trained with a delay-aware empowerment objective. To enable a clear and consistent comparison, we take CDHRL, the foundational framework shared by all three methods, as the reference. Specifically, we express the computational complexity of D3HRL and DECHRL at each stage as a multiple of CDHRL’s baseline cost, plus the overhead incurred by their respective additional 39 modules (e.g., spurious correlation detection in D3HRL and delay distribution modeling in DECHRL). These normalized complexity estimates, derived from the analysis above, are consolidated in Table D.6 below.               

> Causal Discovery Hierarchical Policy Training
> CDHRL O(Single Step SCM Training )4 level × O (Policy Training )
> D3HRL τmax × O (Single Step SCM Training )+O(Spurious Correlation Detection )5 level × O (Policy Training )
> DECHRL τmax × O (Single Step SCM Training )+O(Delay Distribution Modeling )5 level × O (Delay-Aware Policy Training )

Table D.6: Computational Complexity Analysis of three CHRL algorithms on the GetSil-verore task. 

It is evident that CDHRL achieves the lowest computational complexity, as it is limited to modeling single-step, fixed-delay state transitions and causal relation-ships. The key comparison, however, lies between the two delay-aware frameworks, D3HRL and DECHRL, whose computational trade-offs warrant closer examination. As shown in Table D.6, each method introduces distinct algorithmic components. Specifically, DECHRL employs delay distribution modeling and delay-aware em-powerment computation, both of which are relatively lightweight (see detailed analyses in Appendix B and Appendix C). D3HRL relies on spurious correlation detection via conditional mutual information (CMI) estimation, which involves iterative neural network training and consequently incurs higher computational overhead—particularly during the causal discovery phase. Based on this distinc-tion, we can reasonably infer that: (i) the causal discovery phase in D3HRL is more computationally demanding than in DECHRL, whereas (ii) the hierarchical policy training phase in DECHRL is slightly more expensive due to the additional empowerment-based reward calculation . Overall, their total computational costs are comparable, satisfying: 

TCDHRL < TD3HRL ≈ T DECHRL . (D.1) While the computational difference between D3HRL and DECHRL is marginal, DECHRL delivers significant improvements in temporal reasoning and exploration efficiency. Therefore, DECHRL strikes an optimal balance between compu-tational efficiency and advanced temporal modeling capabilities, making it the preferred choice for environments with complex, multi-step temporal dynamics. 

40 Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used Qwen [ 41 ] to check grammatical errors and improve the clarity of the text. After using them, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62372459). 

References 

[1] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, et al., Reinforcement learning, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 11 (1) (1999) 126–134. [2] S. Nath, M. Baranwal, H. Khadilkar, Revisiting state augmentation methods for reinforcement learning with stochastic delays, in: Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on information & knowledge management, 2021, pp. 1346–1355. [3] Y. Bouteiller, S. Ramstedt, G. Beltrame, C. Pal, J. Binas, Reinforcement learning with random delays, in: International conference on learning repre-sentations, 2020. [4] B. Han, Z. Ren, Z. Wu, Y. Zhou, J. Peng, Off-policy reinforcement learn-ing with delayed rewards, CoRR abs/2106.11854 (2021). arXiv:2106. 11854 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11854 

[5] A. Karamzade, K. Kim, M. Kalsi, R. Fox, Reinforcement learning from delayed observations via world models, CoRR abs/2403.12309 (2024). 

arXiv:2403.12309 , doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2403.12309 .URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.12309 

[6] M. Agarwal, V. Aggarwal, Blind decision making: Reinforcement learning with delayed observations, Pattern Recognit. Lett. 150 (2021) 176–182. doi: 10.1016/J.PATREC.2021.06.022 .URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2021.06.022 

41 [7] Z. Yu, C. Fu, H. Zhong, W. Wang, W. Wu, C. J. Xue, Delay-aware reinforce-ment learning: Insights from delay distributional perspective. [8] E. Schuitema, L. Bu¸ soniu, R. Babuška, P. Jonker, Control delay in reinforce-ment learning for real-time dynamic systems: A memoryless approach, in: 2010 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, IEEE, 2010, pp. 3226–3231. [9] W. Wang, D. Han, X. Luo, D. Li, Addressing signal delay in deep reinforcement learning, in: ICLR 2024, 2024. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/ publication/addressing-signal-delay-in-deep-reinforcement-learning 

[10] P. Liotet, D. Maran, L. Bisi, M. Restelli, Delayed reinforcement learning by imitation, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 13528–13556. [11] A. Levy, G. Konidaris, R. Platt, K. Saenko, Learning multi-level hierarchies with hindsight, arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00948 (2017). [12] P.-L. Bacon, J. Harb, D. Precup, The option-critic architecture, in: Proceed-ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 31, 2017. [13] W. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Sung, Lesson: learning to integrate exploration strate-gies for reinforcement learning via an option framework, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03342 (2023). [14] C. Zhao, D. Shi, M. Wang, J. Xia, H. Yang, S. Jin, S. Yang, C. Qiu, D3hrl: A distributed hierarchical reinforcement learning approach based on causal discovery and spurious correlation detection, Neural Networks 195 (2026) 108275. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet. 2025.108275 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0893608025011566 

[15] X. Hu, R. Zhang, K. Tang, J. Guo, Q. Yi, R. Chen, Z. Du, L. Li, Q. Guo, Y. Chen, et al., Causality-driven hierarchical structure discovery for reinforce-ment learning, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022) 20064–20076. 42 [16] J. Peters, D. Janzing, B. Schölkopf, Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms, The MIT Press, 2017. [17] S. Sohn, J. Oh, H. Lee, Hierarchical reinforcement learning for zero-shot generalization with subtask dependencies, Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [18] M. Chevalier-Boisvert, B. Dai, M. Towers, R. de Lazcano, L. Willems, S. Lahlou, S. Pal, P. S. Castro, J. Terry, Minigrid & miniworld: Modu-lar & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks, CoRR abs/2306.13831 (2023). [19] P. Liotet, E. Venneri, M. Restelli, Learning a belief representation for delayed reinforcement learning, in: 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8. [20] Y. Li, Y. Wang, X. Tan, Highly valued subgoal generation for efficient goal-conditioned reinforcement learning, Neural Networks 181 (2025) 106825. 

doi:10.1016/J.NEUNET.2024.106825 .URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2024.106825 

[21] O. Corcoll, R. Vicente, Disentangling controlled effects for hierarchical reinforcement learning, in: Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 178–200. [22] T. E. Lee, S. Vats, S. Girdhar, O. Kroemer, Scale: Causal learning and discovery of robot manipulation skills using simulation, in: CoRL 2023 Workshop on Learning Effective Abstractions for Planning (LEAP), 2023. [23] C. Chuck, K. Black, A. Arjun, Y. Zhu, S. Niekum, Granger causal interaction skill chains, Transactions on Machine Learning Research. [24] B. Chen, Z. Cao, W. Mayer, M. Stumptner, R. Kowalczyk, Hcpi-hrl: Human causal perception and inference-driven hierarchical reinforcement learning, Neural Networks 187 (2025) 107318. [25] M. H. Nguyen, H. Le, S. Venkatesh, Variable-agnostic causal exploration for reinforcement learning, in: Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, 2024, pp. 216–232. 43 [26] S. Mohamed, D. Jimenez Rezende, Variational information maximisation for intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning, Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems 28 (2015). [27] K. Gregor, D. J. Rezende, D. Wierstra, Variational intrinsic control, arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07507 (2016). [28] B. Eysenbach, A. Gupta, J. Ibarz, S. Levine, Diversity is all you need: Learn-ing skills without a reward function, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070 (2018). [29] A. Sharma, S. Gu, S. Levine, V. Kumar, K. Hausman, Dynamics-aware unsupervised discovery of skills, arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01657 (2019). [30] H. Bharadhwaj, M. Babaeizadeh, D. Erhan, S. Levine, Information prior-itization through empowerment in visual model-based rl, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08585 (2022). [31] J. Choi, A. Sharma, H. Lee, S. Levine, S. S. Gu, Variational empowerment as representation learning for goal-based reinforcement learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01404 (2021). [32] H. Cao, F. Feng, M. Fang, S. Dong, T. Yang, J. Huo, Y. Gao, Towards empowerment gain through causal structure learning in model-based rl, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10077 (2025). [33] N. R. Ke, O. Bilaniuk, A. Goyal, S. Bauer, H. Larochelle, B. Schölkopf, M. C. Mozer, C. Pal, Y. Bengio, Learning neural causal models from unknown interventions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075 (2019). [34] Y. Bengio, T. Deleu, N. Rahaman, N. R. Ke, S. Lachapelle, O. Bilaniuk, A. Goyal, C. J. Pal, A meta-transfer objective for learning to disentangle causal mechanisms, in: 8th International Conference on Learning Represen-tations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020, OpenRe-view.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryxWIgBFPS 

[35] P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, R. Scheines, Causation, Prediction, and Search, Second Edition, Adaptive computation and machine learning, MIT Press, 2000. 44 [36] C. Boutilier, R. Dearden, M. Goldszmidt, Stochastic dynamic programming with factored representations, Artif. Intell. 121 (1-2) (2000) 49–107. doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(00)00033-3 .URL https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(00)00033-3 

[37] J. Pearl, Models, reasoning and inference, Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUni-versityPress 19 (2) (2000) 3. [38] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proximal policy optimization algorithms, CoRR abs/1707.06347 (2017). arXiv: 1707.06347 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347 

[39] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, K. Kavukcuoglu, Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning, CoRR abs/1602.01783 (2016). arXiv:1602.01783 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01783 

[40] M. Andrychowicz, D. Crow, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, J. Tobin, P. Abbeel, W. Zaremba, Hindsight experience replay, in: I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 5048–5058. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/ 453fadbd8a1a3af50a9df4df899537b5-Abstract.html 

[41] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D. Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, L. Deng, M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao, S. Liu, S. Luo, T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Z. Qiu, Qwen3 technical report, CoRR abs/2505.09388 (2025). arXiv:2505.09388 ,

doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2505.09388 .URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.09388 

45