Title: When Better Turns Do Not Make Better Agents: Diagnosing the Gap Between Next-Turn Metrics and Workflow Success

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.21187v1

Published Time: Mon, 21 Sep 2026 00:21:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# When Better Turns Do Not Make Better Agents: Diagnosing the Gap Between Next-Turn Metrics and Workflow Success 

Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar *, Xue-Yong Fu, 

Gundeep Singh, Karol Chang, Kevin Sanders, Shi Zong, Tania Habib, Julien Bouvier Tremblay, Shayna Gardiner, Harsh Saini, Matthias Lee, Elena Khasanova, Quinten McNamara, Shashi Bhushan TN 

(Bold in Author Names Denotes Equal Contribution) Dialpad Inc. Abstract 

Agent models are frequently evaluated one de-cision at a time, where the model predicts the next action based on the gold interaction his-tory, which is scored against a reference. We investigate whether improvement under this protocol is predictive of improved autonomous workflow execution. We study pre-SFT and su-pervised fine-tuned (SFT) Qwen3 models at 4B and 14B parameters and Gemma 3 models at 4B and 12B parameters on multi-turn customer-support workflows. We find that SFT consis-tently improves text-turn success, and that over-all next-turn success increases for every model under gold-history evaluation. However, these improvements do not transfer to autonomous workflow execution. Tool-specific gains also vary across metrics and models. None of the four SFT models succeeds under holistic work-flow evaluation, with strict trajectory comple-tion reaching at most 10.4% workflow success. Our results show that next-turn evaluation is not a reliable proxy for workflow success, mo-tivating separate reporting of text quality, local action correctness, tool execution, and end-to-end task completion. 

1 Introduction 

Language-model agents deployed in production settings must produce more than just plausible re-sponses. For instance, a workflow agent needs to generate a factually correct answer, follow the domain policy, invoke tools with state-dependent arguments (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024), gather missing information, incorporate tool results, and recover from failed actions. An error early in an interaction changes the context for every later decision, so agent quality is fundamentally a prop-erty of a trajectory, not the average quality of its turns, a premise underlying recent interactive agent benchmarks (Yao et al., 2024; Barres et al., 2025). Nevertheless, next-turn evaluation, where the gold 

> *Corresponding Author: tahmid.rahman@dialpad.com

history precedes every decision and compares the model’s prediction with a reference using a lexical or semantic similarity metric (Lin, 2004; Zhang et al., 2020; Zha et al., 2023), remains a dominant protocol in practice since it is cheap, reproducible, and verifiable. However, next-turn evaluation has two important limitations. First, because each prediction is based on the correct history, earlier mistakes cannot affect later decisions. It therefore measures how well a model responds from a correct state, rather than whether it can build and maintain that state during an interaction. Second, reference-based metrics may reward an incorrect response that resembles the reference while penalizing a valid response ex-pressed differently. This concern has also been noted by Alkhouli et al. (2025) in their CONFETTI benchmark, in which they mention that the gold trajectory could “artificially inflate” later-turn per-formance through in-context learning. Nonetheless, they did not compare the turn-level evaluation in CONFETTI with end-to-end autonomous execu-tion, where the model must continue from its own previous decisions. To this end, our study directly measures this gap using multi-turn customer-support workflows in the task-oriented dialogue evaluation setting (Qin et al., 2023; Budzianowski et al., 2018). Our re-search question is whether improvements in gold-history next-action scores predict improvements in end-to-end workflow success. We compare pre-SFT and supervised fine-tuned (SFT) (Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022) Qwen3 models (Yang et al., 2025) at 4B and 14B parameters and Gemma 3 models (Gemma Team, 2025) at 4B and 12B. Under gold-history evaluation, SFT improves text quality and overall turn-level performance across all model scales. However, when models must complete workflows using their own previous out-puts, nearly all trajectories requiring tool use led to failure. Thus, the same SFT models that appear arXiv:2609.21187v1 [cs.CL] 18 Sep 2026 effective under turn-level evaluation are found to be ineffective in end-to-end workflow execution. In this paper, we investigate three research ques-tions : (i) whether turn-level improvements predict end-to-end workflow success, (ii) whether aggre-gate scores conceal differences between text gener-ation and tool execution, and (iii) how early errors affect later decisions. Across multi-turn workflows, we find that SFT consistently improves gold-history turn-level performance but rarely enables success-ful execution of tool-requiring workflows. Sep-arating response generation from tool use further shows that improvements in one capability can hide failures in the other, while trajectory analysis re-veals error propagation that gold-history evaluation cannot capture. These findings motivate a mini-mal reporting framework that combines turn-level scores with end-to-end success and trajectory-level error analysis. 

2 Related Work 

Text-generation and reference-based metrics. 

Reference-based metrics such as ROUGE mea-sure lexical overlap (Lin, 2004), while BERTScore and AlignScore measure embedding similarity and source–candidate factual alignment, respectively (Zhang et al., 2020; Zha et al., 2023). These are well suited to isolated response turns but do not di-rectly measure policy compliance or tool execution. LLM judges can recognize a valid response that differs from the reference, but their conclusions remain sensitive to the rubric and context supplied to the judge (Laskar et al., 2025a; Gu et al., 2026). 

Tool-using language agents. A separate line of work studies models that select and invoke exter-nal tools, typically evaluating tool generalization across a broad catalog of functions (Schick et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024; Laskar et al., 2026), with CONFETTI extend-ing this to conversational, turn-level function call-ing (Alkhouli et al., 2025). Our setting instead fixes the tool catalog and governing policy per workflow in advance and asks whether an agent can execute the full multi-turn trajectory, including recovering from errors. 

Task-oriented dialogue and interactive agent benchmarks. Task-oriented dialogue has long studied goal completion through multi-turn inter-action and API-grounded slot filling (Qin et al., 2023; Budzianowski et al., 2018; Rastogi et al., 2020). Recent benchmarks extend evaluation to in-teractive environments (Liu et al., 2024), including policy-constrained tool–agent–user interactions in 

τ -bench and dual-control interaction in τ 2-bench (Yao et al., 2024; Barres et al., 2025). We complement these benchmarks by holding workflows and models fixed while varying only the evaluation protocol, isolating how gold-history, strict tool-matching, and closed-loop evaluation support different conclusions for identical outputs. 

Supervised fine-tuning for agent behavior. Su-pervised fine-tuning on instruction and dialogue data is a standard method for adapting models to follow instructions and use tools (Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Qu et al., 2025), and compact open-weight models are an increasingly attractive target for this adaptation in cost-sensitive deployments (Fu et al., 2024). We treat SFT as a fixed, realistic intervention and ask whether its gains, measured under a gold-history protocol, transfer to closed-loop execution of the same workflows. 

3 Experimental Setup 

3.1 Data and Models Training data. We collect a proprietary dataset from Dialpad 1 covering 130 customer-support workflows that are constructed from business con-versations (Fu et al., 2022; Laskar et al., 2023; Khasanova et al., 2025; Laskar et al., 2025b). Each workflow is represented by the following: a domain policy, a set of available tool schemas, and one or more user goals. Following prior work on tool-use scenario generation and simulated users (Li et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024), we con-struct scenarios that combine these elements and generate multi-turn conversations with two sepa-rate instances of GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025): one acts as the user and the other as the workflow agent. The resulting trajectories contain user messages, assistant responses, tool calls, and tool results. At first, we generated 1800 conversations. Then, each generated conversation is independently checked by Claude-4.5-Opus 2 and Gemini-2.5-Pro (Comanici et al., 2025) for logical consistency, missing workflow steps, and policy compliance; a conversation is retained only when both judges approve it. This filtering removes 773 conversa-tions and leaves 1,027 validated conversations. We 

> 1https://www.dialpad.com/
> 2https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4 -5 Figure 1: An Overview of our Evaluation Protocol

then convert every assistant decision into a next-action example: the input contains the policy, tools, and preceding history, and the target is either a natural-language response or a structured tool call. The final training split contains 5,834 examples (4,093 text responses and 1,741 tool calls), with 664 additional validation examples (466 text and 198 tool). These generated conversations contain 13 turns on average. 

Evaluation data. The held-out evaluation split con-tains 84 validated conversations, yielding 542 next-action examples: 376 natural-language responses and 166 tool calls. Conversations contain 2–18 as-sistant decisions (median 6). The split is held out at the conversation level, and no training conversation snippet is reused in evaluation. Gold-history met-rics score the 542 examples independently; closed-loop evaluation instead assesses each model across the 84 complete conversations by leveraging their state-dependent tool results. 

Models. We compare public Qwen3 models (Yang et al., 2025) at 4B and 14B parameters and Gemma 3 instruction-tuned models (Gemma Team, 2025) at 4B and 12B (P RE -SFT) with the corresponding models after full supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Ev-ery model uses the same training and validation examples and the same five-epoch recipe. 

3.2 Evaluation Protocols 

We evaluate every model under five protocols, each targeting a different capability along the path from producing a plausible utterance to completing an autonomous workflow (see Figure 1). 

(i) Text similarity. For every natural-language decision, the model receives the gold history pre-ceding it, the policy, and the tool definitions, and we compare its response with the reference using the ROUGE-1 metric. 

(ii) Gold-history turn success. Gemini-2.5-Pro at temperature zero judges all model-generated re-sponses (542 turns, covering both text-based re-sponses and tool calls) based on the given policy, tool definitions, gold history, and reference action. The judge model is required to return a binary suc-cess label by assessing action correctness while adhering to the domain policy. 

(iii) Strict tool correctness. For the 166 reference tool-call decisions, we write a deterministic pars-ing script that requires an exact function-name and normalized-argument match between the predic-tion and reference. We report exact accuracy and argument F1, with no partial credit for a plausible but non-matching action. 

(iv) Closed-loop replay. We replay all 84 conver-sations using each model’s own generated assistant history rather than gold history, with a determinis-tic user simulator supplying user turns. We use a deterministic parser to evaluate the tool calls. A correctly matched tool call receives the state-dependent result, while an invalid call receives an error and up to two retries. The workflow succeeds only if the model reaches the end of the conversa-tion without any unresolved tool errors. 

(v) Holistic workflow judgment. Gemini-2.5-Pro judges every closed-loop replay for full user-goal completion where successful workflows do not have any policy violation and no tool errors. 

4 Results 

Table 1 reports performance across the evaluation protocol, from gold-history turn-level evaluation to end-to-end workflow execution. Overall, SFT substantially improves text-based responses, but these gains transfer weakly to tool execution and rarely yield completed workflows. 

4.1 SFT improves text-based turn-level performance 

Under gold-history evaluation, SFT improves per-formance across all model families and scales. Av-eraged across the four models, ROUGE-1 increases by 24.4 points, from 24.8 to 49.2, while LLM-Qwen3 Gemma 3 4B 14B 4B 12B Level Metric Scoring ZS SFT ZS SFT ZS SFT ZS SFT                                                                                 

> Text similarity ROUGE-1 Deterministic 30.6 49.8 12.9 50.5 25.6 46.9 30.0 49.4 Gold-history turn All-turn success LLM judge 29.2 50.7 37.1 54.6 20.1 41.1 27.5 44.5 Gold-history turn Text-turn success LLM judge 32.4 61.4 41.8 64.4 24.7 50.8 33.8 56.9 Gold-history turn Tool-turn success LLM judge 21.7 26.5 26.5 32.5 9.6 19.3 13.3 16.3 Strict tool check Exact call accuracy Deterministic 3.6 13.9 5.4 18.1 3.0 0.0 1.8 1.8 Strict tool check Argument F1 Deterministic 6.3 24.8 10.7 29.0 5.1 0.5 4.5 2.9 Closed-loop replay Tool-workflow completion Deterministic 0/77 3/77 0/77 8/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 Holistic judge Tool-workflow success LLM judge 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77 0/77

Table 1: Results across the evaluation protocols for Qwen3 (4B/14B) and Gemma 3 (4B/12B) under Zero-Shot (ZS) and Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) settings. 

judged text-turn success rises by 25.2 points, from 33.2% to 58.4%. Consequently, all-turn success improves by 19.3 points, from 28.5% to 47.7%. These consistent gains show that SFT helps mod-els better predict the expected next response when given the correct interaction history. 

4.2 Turn-level gains fail to extend to tool use 

Tool-specific improvements are substantially smaller. LLM-judged tool-turn success increases by only 5.9 points on average, from 17.8% to 23.7%, compared with 25.2 points for text turns. Exact call accuracy increases from 3.5% to 8.5%, and argument F1 from 6.7% to 14.3%. These gains are concentrated in Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-14B. Both Gemma 3 models show little or negative im-provement; for example, Gemma 3-4B declines from 3.0% to 0.0% in exact call accuracy and from 5.1% to 0.5% in argument F1. Thus, turn-level scores based on gold history can obscure poor tool use: frequent text turns improve strongly after SFT and raise the overall score even when exact tool execution remains poor or deteriorates. 

4.3 Gold-history overestimates workflow success 

The gap widens when models execute workflows using their own prior outputs. Before SFT, no model completes a tool-requiring workflow. After SFT, Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-14B complete only 3 and 8 workflows, respectively, while neither Gemma 3 model completes any. The best result, from Qwen3-14B, is only 10.4% workflow com-pletion. Moreover, deterministic completion does not imply overall interaction success. The holistic judge identifies no successful tool-requiring work-flow for any model, before or after SFT. A work-flow may complete its tool calls while still failing due to missing information, incorrect responses, policy violations, or improper use of tool results. 

4.4 Evaluation protocol changes conclusion 

The two protocols yield different conclusions about the same SFT interventions. Gold-history evalu-ation indicates broad improvement: every model achieves higher ROUGE-1, text-turn success, and all-turn success after SFT. End-to-end execution instead shows that nearly all tool-requiring work-flows still fail, with none succeeding under holis-tic evaluation. This discrepancy arises because gold-history evaluation restores the correct state before each decision. It tests whether a model can predict the next action from a correct history, but not whether it can construct and maintain that history through its own decisions. End-to-end ex-ecution exposes this limitation by allowing early errors to propagate. Turn-level evaluation is there-fore informative but measures a narrower capability than workflow execution. Reliable agent evaluation should report text quality, tool correctness, work-flow completion, and holistic trajectory success separately, rather than treating aggregate next-turn performance as evidence of end-to-end capability. 

5 Conclusion 

Across four model pairs from two families, SFT clearly improves reference-matched text and next-action prediction under gold-history evaluation. However, tool-call correctness varies across met-rics, model sizes, and families, while end-to-end completion remains low as holistic evaluation finds no successful tool-requiring workflow at any scale. These results show that strong next-turn perfor-mance does not necessarily indicate that an agent can complete a workflow using its own interac-tion history. Future work should validate this find-ing across additional domains, model families, and interactive environments, while developing train-ing methods that explicitly target error recovery, state maintenance, and end-to-end task comple-tion. More broadly, agent evaluations should com-bine turn-level metrics with tool correctness and workflow-level success to provide a more complete account of agent capability. 

Limitations 

Our evaluation covers two model families and one proprietary customer-support domain, limiting gen-eralizability. Closed-loop replay requires exact ref-erence tool calls and uses deterministic gold user turns, potentially rejecting valid alternatives and underrepresenting real interactions. 

Ethics Statement 

All conversations are synthetic and contain no cus-tomer data or personally identifiable information. To help facilitate future work, sanitized prompt tem-plates are provided in the Appendix (see Section A and Section B). 

References 

Tamer Alkhouli, Katerina Margatina, James Gung, Raphael Shu, Claudia Zaghi, Monica Sunkara, and Yi Zhang. 2025. Confetti: Conversational function-calling evaluation through turn-level interactions. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7993–8006. Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ 2-bench: Evaluat-ing conversational agents in a dual-control environ-ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07982 .Paweł Budzianowski, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Bo-Hsiang Tseng, Iñigo Casanueva, Stefan Ultes, Osman Ra-madan, and Milica Gaši´ c. 2018. MultiWOZ: A large-scale multi-domain wizard-of-oz dataset for task-oriented dialogue modelling. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5016–5026. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .Xue-Yong Fu, Cheng Chen, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Shashi Bhushan Tn, and Simon Corston-Oliver. 2022. An effective, performant named entity recognition system for noisy business telephone conversation transcripts. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT 2022) , pages 96–100. Xue-Yong Fu, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Elena Khasanova, Cheng Chen, and Shashi Bhushan Tn. 2024. Tiny titans: Can smaller large language mod-els punch above their weight in the real world for meeting summarization? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 6: Industry Track) ,pages 387–394. Gemma Team. 2025. Gemma 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 .Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, and 1 others. 2026. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. The Innovation , 7(6). Elena Khasanova, Harsh Saini, Md Tahmid Rah-man Laskar, Xue-Yong Fu, Cheng Chen, and Shashi Bhushan Tn. 2025. Dacip-rc: Domain adap-tive continual instruction pre-training via reading comprehension on business conversations. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track ,pages 1867–1877. Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Cheng Chen, Xue-yong Fu, Mahsa Azizi, Shashi Bhushan, and Simon Corston-Oliver. 2023. Ai coach assist: An automated ap-proach for call recommendation in contact centers for agent coaching. In Proceedings of the 61st An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 5: Industry Track) , pages 599– 607. Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Xue-Yong Fu, Seyyed Saeed Sarfjoo, Quinten McNamara, Jonas Robertson, and Shashi Bhushan TN. 2026. From text to voice: A reproducible and verifiable framework for evaluating tool calling llm agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15104 .Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Mohammed Saidul Islam, Ridwan Mahbub, Ahmed Masry, Mizanur Rahman, Amran Bhuiyan, Mir Tafseer Nayeem, Shafiq Joty, Enamul Hoque, and Jimmy Xiangji Huang. 2025a. Judging the judges: Can large vision-language mod-els fairly evaluate chart comprehension and reason-ing? In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 6: Industry Track) , pages 1203–1216. Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Julien Bouvier Tremblay, Xue-Yong Fu, Cheng Chen, and Shashi Bhushan Tn. 2025b. Ai knowledge assist: An automated approach for the creation of knowledge bases for conversa-tional ai agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1856–1866. Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Api-bank: A comprehensive benchmark for tool-augmented llms. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natu-ral language processing , pages 3102–3116. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out , pages 74–81. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Ao-han Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, and 3 others. 2024. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) .Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-structions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Libo Qin, Wenbo Pan, Qiguang Chen, Lizi Liao, Zhou Yu, Yue Zhang, Wanxiang Che, and Min Li. 2023. End-to-end task-oriented dialogue: A survey of tasks, methods, and future directions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5925–5941. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, and 1 others. 2024. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2024, pages 9695–9717. Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. Tool learning with large language mod-els: A survey. Frontiers of Computer Science ,19(8):198343. Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, and Pranav Khaitan. 2020. Towards scalable multi-domain conversational agents: The schema-guided dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 8689–8696. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) .Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 .Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pages 13484– 13508. Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-drew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. 2022. Finetuned lan-guage models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yuheng Zha, Yichi Yang, Ruichen Li, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. AlignScore: Evaluating factual consistency with a unified alignment function. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 11328–11348. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .

A Sanitized Data-Generation Prompts 

The following prompts preserve the roles, inputs, and decisions used in the pipeline while replacing proprietary policies, tools, and company informa-tion with placeholders. 

A.1 Scenario Generation 

> Given the domain policy and available tools, create a realistic customer-support scenario for this workflow. Specify: - the user's objective and relevant initial state; - the desired final state; - information the user initially knows; - the expected tool operations; and - observable criteria for successful completion. The scenario must be solvable using only the policy and tools supplied below. Use synthetic identities and data. DOMAIN POLICY: <SANITIZED_DOMAIN_POLICY>

AVAILABLE TOOLS: <SANITIZED_TOOL_DEFINITIONS> 

A.2 GPT-5 User Simulator 

Act as the customer described below. Remain in character and pursue the assigned objective naturally. - Reveal information gradually and only when appropriate. - Answer the agent's questions consistently with the scenario state and persona. - Do not mention tools, policies, prompts, or simulation. - End when the goal is met or cannot be completed. SCENARIO AND OBJECTIVE: <SANITIZED_SCENARIO> SYNTHETIC IDENTITY AND PERSONA: <SYNTHETIC_USER_PROFILE> CONVERSATION SO FAR: <DIALOGUE_HISTORY> Return only the next user message. 

A.3 GPT-5 Workflow Agent 

Act as a customer-support agent operating under the domain policy below. - Follow the workflow and all policy constraints. - Maintain the conversation state and request missing information when needed. - Call an available tool when the workflow requires it. - Use tool results before making state-dependent claims. - Handle invalid requests and tool errors safely. Return either the next natural-language response or a structured tool call. DOMAIN POLICY: <SANITIZED_DOMAIN_POLICY> AVAILABLE TOOLS: <SANITIZED_TOOL_DEFINITIONS> CONVERSATION SO FAR: <DIALOGUE_HISTORY_WITH_TOOL_RESULTS> 

A.4 Conversation Validation 

This prompt is run independently with each valida-tion judge. A conversation is retained only when both judges approve it. 

Review the complete synthetic conversation for use as a workflow-training example. Approve it only if the agent follows the supplied policy, uses tools appropriately, remains consistent with tool results, and reaches a sensible outcome for the scenario. Reject it for a missing required step, contradiction, unsupported claim, invalid tool use, policy violation, or inconsistent simulated-user behavior. DOMAIN POLICY AND TOOLS: <SANITIZED_POLICY_AND_TOOLS> SCENARIO: <SANITIZED_SCENARIO> GENERATED CONVERSATION: <SYNTHETIC_CONVERSATION> Return JSON only: {"decision": "APPROVE or REJECT", "reasons": ["brief reason"] }

B Sanitized Evaluation-Judge Prompts 

These prompts show the information supplied to the judges and the binary decisions reported in the paper. Auxiliary diagnostic fields used during analysis are omitted. 

B.1 Gold-History Turn Judge 

Evaluate one assistant decision in a multi-turn customer-support workflow. Judge only what should happen at this turn; do not require final workflow completion at an intermediate turn. Use the policy, tools, correct history, and reference action to determine whether the prediction is an acceptable next action. Alternative wording and safe, semantically equivalent actions are allowed. A tool call must select an appropriate function and use arguments grounded in the supplied history. DOMAIN POLICY: <SANITIZED_DOMAIN_POLICY> AVAILABLE TOOLS: <SANITIZED_TOOL_DEFINITIONS> CORRECT HISTORY BEFORE THIS TURN: <GOLD_HISTORY> REFERENCE ACTION: <REFERENCE_ACTION> MODEL PREDICTION: <MODEL_OUTPUT> Return JSON only: {"turn_success": true or false, "failure_category": "none or primary failure", "rationale": "brief evidence-based explanation" }

B.2 Holistic Workflow Judge 

Evaluate whether the candidate replay completes the user's workflow under the supplied domain policy. Use the reference trajectory to understand the scenario, required state changes, and acceptable final outcome. Do not reward wording similarity. Safe alternative wording or an equivalent valid path is allowed, but required verification, policy constraints, and consequential tool actions must be satisfied. Accepted tool attempts received the recorded tool result. Rejected attempts were invalid at that workflow state. A replay that ends before the user goal is resolved is not successful. DOMAIN POLICY AND TOOLS: <SANITIZED_POLICY_AND_TOOLS> REFERENCE TRAJECTORY: <SANITIZED_REFERENCE_TRAJECTORY> CANDIDATE CLOSED-LOOP REPLAY: <SANITIZED_CANDIDATE_REPLAY> Return JSON only: {"success": true or false, "failure_category": "none or primary failure", "rationale": "brief evidence-based explanation" }