Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, pages 38781–38796
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
Agentic Verification for Ambiguous Query Disambiguation
Youngwon Lee1*
Seung-won Hwang1†
Ruofan Wu2*
Feng Yan2
Danmei Xu3
Moutasem Akkad3
Zhewei Yao3
Yuxiong He3
1Seoul National University
2University of Houston
3Snowflake AI Research
Abstract
We study ambiguous-query disambiguation in
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). Prior
Diversify-then-Verify (DtV) pipelines first gen-
erate interpretations and then retrieve evidence,
often introducing ungrounded queries that can-
not be answered from the corpus and requir-
ing costly post-hoc pruning and verification.
We propose VERDICT, a novel approach that
unifies diversification with verification by in-
tegrating retriever relevance and generator an-
swerability feedback early. This not only re-
duces cascading errors but also enables par-
allelism.
On ASQA, VERDICT improves
grounding-aware F1 by an average of 23% over
the strongest baselines across multiple LLM
backbones.
1
Introduction
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG; Lewis
et al., 2020) is expected to complement large lan-
guage models (LLMs), trained on static data, when
they struggle to provide reliable responses without
external retrieval. This challenge is particularly
evident in enterprise settings, where queries are
asked on domain-specific and potentially evolving
corpora inaccessible during LLM training. In such
settings, answering a short, vague query requires
RAG to disambiguate the query, into interpretations
that can be answered from the corpus.
A natural approach is to retrieve a set of pas-
sages then generate disambiguations that can be
answered from that set as in RAC (Kim et al.,
2023), where a single top-k retrieval defines the
scope of possible disambiguations. However, in
such approaches, disambiguation coverage suffers
from bounded recall (V et al., 2025). If the top-k
passages do not sufficiently cover different mean-
ings of the query, valid disambiguations may never
* Work done while at Snowflake.
† Correspondence to: seungwonh@snu.ac.kr.
be considered. Increasing k only partially allevi-
ates this issue: it also introduces more irrelevant
passages, and passing a large retrieved set to the
generator at once makes it harder for the LLM to
produce clean disambiguations.
Diversify-then-Verify (DtV) methods (Min et al.,
2020; Cole et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; In et al.,
2025) attempt to address this limitation by increas-
ing retrieval diversity. They first generate candi-
date disambiguations with LLMs to diversify, then
verify whether each disambiguation is actually sup-
ported by retrieved evidence. This can improve
recall, but it does so before seeing evidence. As a
result, the system cannot know which disambigua-
tions are actually answerable from the corpus. Such
unsupported disambiguations may still trigger re-
trieval and downstream processing, only to be dis-
carded later. For example, in Figure 1(a), the query
“What is HP” may refer to Hewlett-Packard, horse-
power, or Harry Potter. LLMs trained on general
knowledge may generate all three, even when the
enterprise corpus lacks any reference to Harry Pot-
ter.
To address this limitation, we propose VER-
DICT (Verified DIversification with Consolida-
Tion), which integrates diversification with veri-
fication rather than performing them as separate
stages. Unlike RAC, VERDICT does not rely on a
single retrieved pool followed by one long-context
generation step; unlike DtV, it does not generate
disambiguations before seeing evidence. Instead,
VERDICT first retrieves a high-recall universe for
the ambiguous query and then processes each pas-
sage independently to determine whether it sup-
ports a concrete disambiguated question-answer
pair. In this way, retrieval provides coverage over
meanings present in the corpus, while passage-wise
generation provides answerability. Diversification
is therefore grounded at the point of creation, and
unsupported disambiguations are pruned before
they trigger additional retrieval.
38781


: What is hp?
What is HP Inc. and what products or services does the company offer?
What is Harry Potter?
What is the definition of horsepower as a unit of measurement?
Diversify
Verify/Pruning
…
…
…
(a) DtV
❌
Pseudo-interpretations
: What is hp?
…
❌
Verified Diversification
Retrieve Universe
What is Hewlett-Packard?
One of the largest computer …
What is horsepower?
A unit of measurement of power
(b) VERDICT (Ours)
Query Relaxation
& Retrieval
Short for Hewlett-Packard, one of the world's 
largest computer and electronics companies. 
Founded in 1939 by William Hewlett and David 
Packard, HP is best known today for …
The HP Spectre x360 13 is a great little laptop, 
but if battery life matters to you a lot, opt for the 
HD display, not the more expensive 4K.
Horsepower (hp) is a unit of measurement 
of power, or the rate at which work is done, 
usually in reference to the …
(1) Relevance feedback from retriever
(2) Answerability feedback from generator
Retriever call
LLM call
(Ungrounded: pruned after verification)
(Not answerable: pruned)
Figure 1: Comparison of (a) DtV (Diversify-then-Verify) and (b) VERDICT (Verified DIversification with Con-
solidaTion, ours). Grayed-out icons represent passages that failed verification and were thus pruned; solid arrows
represent retriever calls while dashed arrows refer to LLM calls.
Figure 1(b) illustrates that this integrated ap-
proach, verified diversification, leverages two com-
plementary signals, namely the relevance feedback
from the retriever and the answerability feedback
from the generator LLM. Our parallel design also
allows us to consolidate these two signals across
interpretations. We cluster the generated interpre-
tations to mitigate noise from either the retriever
or the generator, without invoking additional re-
triever or generator calls. This has the additional
benefit of accounting for the inherent redundancy
in the retrieved passages, where multiple passages
may support the same interpretation. While pre-
vious pipelines rely solely on the generator LLM
to avoid generating duplicate interpretations, VER-
DICT elegantly accounts for this by choosing the
single best representative interpretation from each
cluster.
Finally, the tight coupling of each interpretation
with its supporting passage in VERDICT facilitates
the evaluation of grounded metrics, which are in
high demand in RAG (Li et al., 2023a; Liu et al.,
2023). As grounded metrics such as citation qual-
ity and verifiability are increasingly important in
RAG, we use both existing and grounded metrics to
demonstrate that VERDICT produces disambigua-
tions that are not only diverse and accurate but also
well-grounded.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• We introduce VERDICT, a novel framework
for ambiguous question handling that unifies
diversification and verification.
• We show that VERDICT improves efficiency
by eliminating unnecessary retrieval and veri-
fication, and by enabling parallel execution. It
also enhances effectiveness by mitigating cas-
cading errors typical of sequential pipelines.
• We
empirically
validate
VERDICT
on
widely adopted ambiguous QA benchmark,
ASQA (Stelmakh et al., 2022), with average
gain of 23% in F1 score across different back-
bone LLMs.1
• Our code and evaluation are publicly avail-
able.2
2
Related Work
This section reviews prior work on the DtV work-
flow and on treating the retriever as an environment.
Diversification.
The goal of this phase is to turn
the given query into a diverse set of interpretations.
Min et al. (2021) and Sun et al. (2023) studied an
iterative approach by identifying one new intent
1The gain is computed against the best baseline for each
backbone LLM.
2https://github.com/ludaya/verdict
38782


at a time. Gao et al. (2021) generated clarifica-
tion questions conditioned on generated answers
from ambiguous questions, and then answers the
clarification questions again.
With LLMs, few-shot in-context learning was
used to generate clarifications or query rewrites
directly, relying solely on their internal knowledge
captured during pretraining (Kim et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2023).
Verification.
Errors in retrieval or intent infer-
ence may generate question-passage pair that can-
not provide the expected answer. Verification aims
at pruning such pairs. Shao and Huang (2022)
train a verifier to choose correct answers from a list
of candidates drafted from each passage without
question clarifications. More recent works such
as Self-RAG (Asai et al., 2024) and Corrective
RAG (Yan et al., 2024) also train a verifier to decide
whether the retrieved passages are relevant enough
to assist answer generation. To avoid verifier train-
ing, LLMs may leverage its parametric knowledge
instead to verify (Li et al., 2024). Alternatively,
MADAM-RAG (Wang et al., 2025) poses verifi-
cation as a process of aggregating signals through
multi-agent debate, where retrieved documents are
assigned to individual LLM agents to reach a con-
sensus.
Our
Distinction.
Unlike
existing
DtV
ap-
proaches that consider verification as a post-hoc
step, we combine diversification and verification to
avoid inefficiencies and sequential dependencies.
3
Preliminary
3.1
Problem Formulation
Our formulation adheres to the conventional am-
biguous question answering setting. Given an am-
biguous question q and a passage corpus C, the
task is to identify a set of valid interpretations
Q = {q1, . . . , qN}, where each qi resolves one
plausible meaning of q, and corresponding answers
Y = {y1, . . . , yN}. Because our focus is retrieval-
augmented generation, we treat a grounded model
output as a set of triples ˆT = {(ˆqj, ˆyj, ˆpj)}M
j=1,
where ˆpj ∈C is the evidence passage associated
with generated interpretation ˆqj and answer ˆyj. We
use ˆQ and ˆY to denote the question and answer
projections of ˆT , respectively. Human annotations
are denoted with tildes, e.g., ˜Q and ˜Y.
3.2
Baselines: RAC and DIVA
In this section, we formally describe the main base-
line method, DIVA (In et al., 2025), the most recent
work with state-of-the-art performance which best
exemplifies the existing DtV approaches. We start
by describing a simpler form, RAC (Kim et al.,
2023), which directly prompts an LLM with the
passages retrieved with q. The retrieved passages
form a universe Uq = TopKk(C, q; s), where
TopKk(C, x; s) denotes the top-k passages in cor-
pus C under retriever score s(x, p). Then, RAC
generates ( ˆQ, ˆY) under instruction IG,3 without di-
versification or verification. As mentioned earlier,
this suffers from (1) lack of verification for pas-
sages in Uq, and (2) the conflict between longer
input context and promoting coverage of interpre-
tations, both depending on k = |Uq|.
DIVA first diversifies the query, or, identifies
pseudo-interpretations R = {r1, r2, . . . , rL} by
prompting the LLM with q and instruction IP, with-
out accessing any retrieved knowledge. Each gener-
ated pseudo-interpretation ri ∈R is then used as a
search query to retrieve top-k supporting passages,
whose union forms its retrieval universe
UR ←
[
r∈R
TopKk(C, r; s),
(1)
where the subscript R indicates that the uni-
verse UR is derived from the set of pseudo-
interpretations R. As pseudo-interpretations can
be ungrounded and the resulting UR can be noisy,
verification phase follows, to examine each pseudo-
interpretation with universe UR. After this phase,
UR is reduced to a verified subset UV = {p ∈
UR | ∃r∈R Verify(r, p) = 1}, from which disam-
biguated queries and answers ( ˆQ, ˆY) are generated
under instruction IG.
We identify the challenges and inefficiencies in
DtV line of work as follows:
1. UR: Each pseudo-interpretation r ∈R incurs
at least one retriever call, some of which are
ungrounded and could introduce noise.
2. UV : Obtaining a verified subset UV requires
to process all (r, p) pairs, for example, in-
ducing |R| Verify calls with input size of
O(|UR|) each.4 Plus, such long-context ver-
3For baseline reproduction, we reuse IG from RAC; see
Appendix G.
4In et al. (2025) pruned UR in advance, though asymptotic
cost remains unchanged.
38783


ification requires a powerful LLM, which in-
creases cost and hinders generalizability.
4
Method
We illustrate VERDICT with two distinctions: Ver-
ified Diversification (Section 4.1) and Consolidated
Feedback (Section 4.2). In Section 4.3, we provide
grounded evaluation protocols.
4.1
Verified Diversification
Unlike DtV, a valid interpretation in grounded dis-
ambiguation must be both plausible for q and an-
swerable from C. We therefore construct grounded
candidate triples T0 upfront by combining verifica-
tion with diversification, rather than viewing veri-
fication as a separate, post-hoc process. This con-
struction leverages feedback from both the retriever
and the generator.
Relevance Feedback.
“Relevance feedback from
the retriever” in Figure 1 shows how we first re-
trieve U = TopKk(C, q′; s) with a single round of
retrieval before generating interpretations, where
q′ is a relaxed query obtained from the LLM with
prompt IR.5 With relaxed q′ and choice of a larger
k for retrieval,6 we further increase the diversity
and coverage of the interpretations while keeping
the process computationally efficient.
Answerability Feedback.
“Answerability feed-
back from the LLM generator” in Figure 1 prunes
interpretations that cannot be answered with evi-
dence. Conditioned on our high-coverage universe
U, the LLM generator is prompted to identify in-
terpretations ˆQ and corresponding answers ˆY from
each passage.
This ensures the answerability of each disam-
biguated query ˆqi, given the passage ˆpi from which
it was derived: For example, in the figure, DtV
retains passages like p2, which mentions HP prod-
ucts but cannot answer the query asking what HP
is, whereas our approach prunes such passages
through failed execution of generating a question-
answer pair.
In contrast, we keep p1, where a valid question-
answer pair can be generated. For each pi ∈U,
the generator receives only (q, pi) with prompt
IE and either returns a pair (ˆqi, ˆyi) or abstains.7
5The prompt IR can be found in Figure 5.
6k was empirically tuned to 20, when the interpretation
coverage plateaus, e.g., yielding identical results to top-100
with a GPT-4o backbone.
7The LLM prompt IE can be found in Figure 6.
Retriever
LLM
# calls
# calls
input len.
DtV
O(|R|)
O(|R|) × O(|UR|)
VERDICT
O(1)
O(|U|) ×
O(1)
Table 1: Cost comparison between DtV and VERDICT
in terms of retriever and LLM calls per question. For
LLM calls, the input context length is measured by the
number of passages, with the total input size determined
by multiplying this length by the number of calls.
The successful outputs form candidate triples T0 =
{(ˆqi, ˆyi, pi) | pi ∈U, ˆqi̸ = null}.
From a practical standpoint, this passage-wise
extraction can be executed in parallel, with each
LLM call processing a single passage at a time.
This minimizes the input sequence length for each
call, optimizing both latency and computational
overhead while reducing hallucination in less capa-
ble models.
Table 1 provides comparison of asymptotic cost
of retrieval and LLM calls in VERDICT and DtV.
First, while VERDICT makes a single call to the
retriever to build U, DtV issues several search
queries, proportional to the number of pseudo-
interpretations | ˆQ|. Next, the number of LLM calls
and input size of each call, measured in terms of the
number of passages, also shows the efficiency of
VERDICT. DtV provides several passages as a list
input, increasing the context size and the chance of
introducing noise while processing the elongated
input. In contrast, VERDICT requests answerabil-
ity feedback for each passage in U, using only a
single passage as a context.
While we assume that each interpretation of q
can be answered using a single passage, an assump-
tion inherently linked to the chosen passage gran-
ularity, VERDICT can be naturally extended to
a multi-hop setting by evaluating small groups of
passages (e.g., pairs).
4.2
Consolidated Feedback
While Section 4.1 ensures that each interpretation
ˆqi is relevant to q and answerable using its sup-
porting passage ˆpi, our design allows us to account
for any residual noise arising from either imperfect
retrieval or LLM, by consolidating the candidate
triples in T0, without requiring additional retrieval
or LLM inference.
Specifically, question-answer pairs from gener-
ator are projected into a latent space Rd using an
encoder f from the retriever (Figure 2, right box).
38784


Figure 2: Illustration of the full pipeline of VERDICT: Verified diversification (Section 4.1) followed by consolida-
tion phase (Section 4.2). On the right, yellow and blue dots represent embeddings of generated interpretations and
their answers, embedded together after concatenation, while yellow color denotes medoids.
We then cluster these pairs and discard items that
do not belong to any dense cluster, i.e., “outliers”
in the density-based sense. In our setting, these
typically arise from (1) interpretations that are not
answerable from the associated passage, or (2) low-
faithfulness rewrites loosely related to the original
query q; excluding them improves groundedness
without adding an external verifier. Instead, mul-
tiple generator and retriever feedback signals are
consolidated, which aligns with seeking the most
consistent outputs (Wang et al., 2023), improving
robustness by aggregating multiple LLM outputs.
The final output ˆT contains the medoid triple
from each non-outlier cluster. Selecting a medoid
question per cluster also eliminates duplicate in-
terpretations arising from the inherent redundancy
in the corpus, where multiple passages may con-
vey similar information and thus support identical
interpretations. In contrast, both RAC and DIVA
defer deduplication to the answer generation stage,
leaving it solely to the LLM.
4.3
Grounding in Evaluation
This section discusses existing evaluation metrics,
contrasted with grounded evaluation, which is often
required in enterprise RAG scenarios.
Existing: Ungrounded Metrics.
Current bench-
marks (Min et al., 2020; Stelmakh et al., 2022)
measure recall by checking whether diverse human-
annotated interpretations “match” model-generated
ones. Lexical similarity (e.g., BLEU) determines
the match between generated (ˆq) and reference (˜q)
interpretations as a binary decision:
V (ˆq, ˜q) ∈{0, 1}.
(2)
We classify this as ungrounded evaluation, as
it does not assess whether the generation is sup-
ported by a passage. Moreover, such reference-
based evaluation suffers from bounded coverage
(missing grounded interpretations) or includes un-
grounded interpretations, thereby providing an un-
fair boost.
Proposed: Grounded Metrics.
Whether an an-
swer can be grounded to the correct passage, known
as verifiability or citation quality (Li et al., 2023a;
Liu et al., 2023), has been a key evaluation criterion
particularly in enterprise RAG settings.
We extend this idea to disambiguation: grounded
metrics evaluate not only lexical matches, but also
whether the interpretation can be supported by a
passage in the corpus. This leads to an extended
binary evaluation function factoring in passage:
V (ˆq, ˆp) ∈{0, 1},
(3)
where ˆp is the supporting passage for ˆq, as identi-
fied by the model.
With this extended V , grounded precision (G-
precision) is defined as the ratio of correctly
grounded among model-generated interpretations:
G-Precision =
1
| ˆQ|
X
ˆq∈ˆ
Q
V (ˆq, ˆp).
(4)
Unlike conventional recall, encouraging un-
grounded diversity, optimizing for G-precision pe-
nalizes ungrounded interpretations. Similarly, re-
call metric can be grounded to evaluate model-
generated interpretations against the grounded
gold set, ¯Q, complementing the incomplete human
annotations.
G-Recall =
1
| ¯Q|
X
¯q∈¯
Q
V (¯q, ˆp),
(5)
Compared to ungrounded recall, G-recall ensures
that interpretations lacking corpus support, such
38785


as Harry Potter are not rewarded, while grounded
interpretations are encouraged. Due to its extended
matching mechanism, G-recall is never lower than
ungrounded recall, but the increase in the score
remains marginal for models that overfit to un-
grounded diversity. We further elaborate on the
grounded metrics in Appendix A.
5
Results
In this section, we empirically validate VERDICT
ensures human-level diversity, while balancing
with grounding accuracy.
5.1
Experimental Settings
5.1.1
Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate diversity, we report the average number
of generated interpretations per query | ˆQ|, the pro-
portion of queries with sufficient diversity, denoted
Sufficient%8 and the (ungrounded) recall computed
against human interpretations without grounding.
For grounded metrics, we use G-precision and G-
recall in Section 4.3, and G-F1 score, defined as the
harmonic mean of precision and recall, balancing
the objectives of both.
5.1.2
Evaluation Datasets
We consider the ASQA benchmark (Stelmakh et al.,
2022) as our main target dataset for evaluation. It
is built upon the AmbigNQ benchmark (Min et al.,
2020) which provides human-annotated interpreta-
tions ˜Q, along with corresponding answers ˜Y for
each ambiguous question q. Each interpretation ˜qi
is optionally attached with a supporting passage
˜pi from the corpus C, Wikipedia. We utilize its
validation split, which consists of 948 examples.
5.1.3
Baselines and Implementation Details
We compare VERDICT with RAC (Kim et al.,
2023) and DIVA (In et al., 2025) illustrated in Sec-
tion 3.2, the latter serving as the representative
for DtV frameworks. We also evaluate pseudo-
interpretations in DIVA as a separate baseline,
to study how LLM diversification leads to un-
grounded interpretations. This variant, denoted
as “DIVA−Verification” in Table 2, also serves as
a lightweight, efficiency-oriented baseline.
The retrieval system comprises arctic-embed
(Merrick et al., 2024)9 based first-phase re-
8We deduplicate the generated interpretations with the
prompt ID in Figure 9, and count unique interpretations.
9Snowflake/snowflake-arctic-embed-m-v2.0
trieval and second-phase passage reranking using
gte-Qwen2 (Li et al., 2023b).10
For the clustering algorithm in the consolida-
tion phase described in Section 4.2, we used HDB-
SCAN (Campello et al., 2013), a hierarchical
density-based clustering algorithm. As the encoder
f for obtaining embeddings, we reused the same
gte-Qwen2 embedding model used in retrieval. For
decoding, greedy decoding was used to obtain de-
terministic responses from LLMs. More details can
be found in Appendix C.
5.2
Results
We now evaluate whether VERDICT delivers di-
verse yet grounded interpretations efficiently and
why its design reduces cascading errors. We orga-
nize the analysis around five research questions:
• RQ1: Is VERDICT diverse?
• RQ2: Does diversity balance with grounding?
• RQ3: What are the individual contributions of
VERDICT’s components, and how are they
tunable?
• RQ4: Is VERDICT efficient?
• RQ5:
Does VERDICT generalize across
datasets, domains and tasks?
VERDICT ensures human-level diversity.
Ta-
ble 2 reports scores of VERDICT, human-
annotation, RAC (Kim et al., 2023), and DtV (In
et al., 2025), in terms of diversity metrics ‘| ˆQ|’,
‘Sufficient%’, and ‘Recall’ (Section 5.1.1).
Across all three, VERDICT’s output is compa-
rable to human annotations and remains consistent
across model sizes. In contrast, diversity of inter-
pretations from DIVA and RAC tend to be highly
affected by model choice or size. For example,
with the smaller model, 8B, the baseline output be-
comes noticeably less diverse, e.g., Sufficient% is
dropped to <1%. This robust performance validates
that VERDICT generalizes better across models,
a direct benefit of its per-passage context isola-
tion, which avoids the long-context reasoning that
smaller models struggle with.
While Table 2 shows that DIVA achieves higher
ungrounded recall, it is often inflated by generating
plausible but ungrounded interpretations, such as
“Harry Potter” for the query “What is HP” even
10Alibaba-NLP/gte-Qwen2-7B-instruct
38786


Existing–Ungrounded
Grounded
Method
| ˆQ|
Sufficient%
Recall
G-Precision
G-Recall
G-F1
LLaMA 3.1 8B
DIVA (In et al., 2025)
1.36
0.21
21.36
76.78
25.02
37.74
−Verification
2.26
1.37
40.24
52.75
44.43
48.23
RAC (Kim et al., 2023)
0.93
8.09
11.40
84.27
17.43
28.89
VERDICT (Ours)
3.78
23.76
36.76
61.51
54.77
57.94
LLaMA 3.3 70B
DIVA
2.06
5.60
32.44
69.89
36.55
48.00
−Verification
3.68
34.73
47.23
46.25
52.16
49.03
RAC
3.78
57.81
45.27
76.71
50.29
60.75
VERDICT
3.70
24.21
36.66
81.50
58.04
67.80
GPT-4o
DIVA
1.73
3.80
25.57
72.34
29.38
41.79
−Verification
3.07
19.51
45.39
51.35
49.85
50.59
RAC
2.12
15.42
23.43
84.79
36.57
51.10
VERDICT
3.16
21.49
37.41
92.82
57.25
70.82
Human interpretations ˜Q
3.36
22.02
·
65.47
·
·
Table 2: Evaluation of diversity and correctness of generated interpretations on ASQA validation set, with both
ungrounded and grounded metrics. “DIVA−Verification” refers to the pseudo-interpretations R generated before
retrieval and verification.
when the corpus has no relevant documents. VER-
DICT intentionally prunes such interpretations
early; this deliberate trade-off is precisely what
leads to its superior performance on grounded met-
rics, as discussed next.
VERDICT ensures grounded diversity.
VER-
DICT’s strategy of early, localized verification pre-
vents ungrounded interpretations from ever enter-
ing the pipeline. As shown in Table 2, this results
in VERDICT achieving the highest G-precision,
of 93% with GPT-4o and 81% with LLaMA 70B
as the backbone LLM, while obtaining diverse
enough interpretations at the same time. In contrast,
G-precision shows that 35% of human-annotated
interpretations and up to 53% of DtV interpreta-
tions are not grounded in the corpus. As a result,
baselines fall behind grounded interpretations from
VERDICT in terms of G-recall as well.
This gap between ungrounded and grounded
scores indicates cascading errors in the baselines:
ungrounded pseudo-interpretations proceed to re-
trieval and late verification, inflate ungrounded re-
call, and then depress grounded precision/recall
once support is required. By deciding answerabil-
ity per passage before any long-context reasoning
and pruning duplicates in consolidation, VERDICT
truncates these branches rather than letting them
propagate.
These results reinforce our earlier discussion
in Section 4.3: DtV, despite achieving higher
Clustering
| ˆQ|
G-Precision
G-Recall
Parameter
Default
3.70
81.50
58.04
Conservative
2.41
82.40
50.72
Embedding
f(ˆq; ˆy)
3.70
81.50
58.04
f(ˆq)
3.65
78.21
57.27
Table 3: Clustering strategies and performance of VER-
DICT with 70B generator. f(ˆq; ˆy) denotes embedding
the concatenated interpretation-answer pair, while f(ˆq)
embeds the interpretation alone. Shaded results are
based on default setting, and were copied from Table 2.
Redundancy (%, ↓)
VERDICT
10.21
VERDICT −clustering
21.94
Table 4:
Redundant interpretations are effectively
pruned during clustering.
ungrounded recall, suffers from the lowest G-
precision across all backbone LLMs, highlighting
its tendency to generate ungrounded interpretations.
In contrast, both RAC and VERDICT produce
more accurately grounded interpretations, with
VERDICT further benefiting from both retriever
and generator feedback. The larger gap between
ungrounded recall and G-recall for our method, ul-
timately boosting grounded recall to about 58%,
also shows VERDICT’s interpretations are well-
supported by their corresponding passages.
38787


Variant
| ˆQ|
G-Precision
G-Recall
VERDICT (full)
3.16
92.82
57.25
Retriever-only
3.59
68.35
55.08
Generator-only
1.15
91.10
24.36
Table 5: Ablation study of retriever and generator feed-
back in VERDICT. Detailed setting can be found in
Appendix C.
Finally, G-F1 scores, measuring the balance of
G-precision and G-recall, show a clear performance
gap between VERDICT and the baselines in pursu-
ing both accurately grounded and diverse interpre-
tations. For instance, while RAC achieves higher
G-precision with the 8B backbone, it fails to en-
sure sufficient diversity, i.e., average interpretation
per question is lower than 1. This leads to sig-
nificantly lower G-recall and, consequently, G-F1
score, reflecting its failure to provide meaningful
interpretations of the original ambiguous question.
Component-wise
contributions.
To
answer
RQ3, we analyze the contributions of VERDICT’s
core components: The two feedback signals in ver-
ified diversification, and consolidation.
First, to isolate the impact of relevance and an-
swerability feedback, we analyze the effect of ab-
lating each signal. A retriever-only variant sees its
G-precision drop sharply from 93% to 68%, con-
firming that many retrieved passages are relevant
but not sufficient to answer a specific interpreta-
tion. Conversely, a generator-only variant suffers a
catastrophic drop in diversity (| ˆQ| falls from 3.16
to 1.15) and G-recall (from 57% to 24%), as the
generator has no grounded context to work from.
These results confirm that both feedback signals are
critical and work synergistically to achieve diverse
and grounded disambiguation.
Second, we analyze the consolidation phase. Ta-
ble 4 shows that consolidation effectively dedu-
plicates interpretations. In addition, Table 3 also
shows this step provides tunable control over the
final output. Using a more conservative cluster-
ing setting increases precision at the cost of recall,
a knob not available in other methods where it is
solely up to the LLM to decide the number of result-
ing interpretations. The same table also shows that
the performance of VERDICT is robust against the
choice of embedding function f, yielding consis-
tent performance. This demonstrates that while the
joint feedback is the primary driver of performance,
the consolidation phase acts as a crucial final step
Latency (s, ↓)
VERDICT
2.12
DIVA
5.34
Table 6: Average end-to-end latency of VERDICT and
DIVA.
DIVA
RAC
VERDICT
Answer Recall (%)
26.1
27.4
35.8
Table 7: Answer recall on AmbigDocs (validation split).
for refining, denoising, and controlling the output.
Finally, we compare our consolidation phase
with multi-agent debate in Appendix D. Results
further show that our clustering-based consoli-
dation is preferable to a simplified multi-agent
method, yielding higher performance and substan-
tially lower latency.
Parallel processing improves efficiency.
Turn-
ing to RQ4, Table 6 shows that the end-to-end la-
tency of VERDICT is substantially lower than that
of DtV. The reduction comes from structuring di-
versification and verification to operate indepen-
dently for each retrieved passage, which removes
sequential dependencies and enables concurrent
LLM calls. In contrast, DIVA’s late, long-context
verification introduces longer serialized steps. A vi-
sual comparison of the two pipelines and a detailed
latency breakdown are provided in Appendix B.
VERDICT generalizes to entity-level ambigu-
ity.
To answer RQ5, we first evaluate VERDICT
on a different disambiguation benchmark, Ambig-
Docs (Lee et al., 2024), which primarily targets
entity-level disambiguation, where the task is to
resolve which specific referent is meant. Our main
target benchmark, ASQA, on the other hand, em-
phasizes generating distinct plausible interpreta-
tions by completing underspecified intent. Despite
this difference in ambiguity type, our results show
that VERDICT generalizes well; it achieves higher
answer recall on the AmbigDocs validation split
than both DIVA and RAC as shown in Table 7, indi-
cating that our verified diversification mechanism
is beneficial for resolving entity ambiguity as well.
We note that the AmbigDocs metric, answer re-
call, measures the recall of ground-truth answers
(entities) that can be derived from some Wikipedia
article. As correct entity recovery requires identify-
ing corpus-grounded answers, this result provides
complementary evidence that improved grounding
38788


| ˆQ|
Recall
G-Precision
DIVA
1.53
73.3
78.6
−Verification
2.97
66.7
30.2
VERDICT
1.87
86.7
90.1
Table 8: Performance on private, enterprise benchmark.
The (ungrounded) recall is computed against the original
query before rewriting during the dataset preparation
process.
translates into better answer quality.
VERDICT also generalizes to proprietary en-
terprise data.
To reflect enterprise usage, we
evaluate VERDICT and baseline methods on a
private, proprietary corporate IT-document corpus
(215 internal PDFs) with 60 human-authored query-
answer pairs and supporting passages. The docu-
ment collection comprises internal, IT-related cor-
porate PDFs, which were first converted to plain
text. Then, human experts annotated 60 queries,
each paired with ground-truth answers and sup-
porting documents.
In order to repurpose this
benchmark for the ambiguous question answering
task, the queries are rewritten to introduce greater
ambiguity, where the original query is regarded
as the human-annotated interpretation in ASQA.
Query types include, but are not limited to, soft-
ware configuration, compliance/policy and internal
troubleshooting.
As shown in Table 8, VERDICT also outper-
forms the baselines in this enterprise-specific set-
ting, where the private document corpus naturally
constrains unsupported disambiguations.
VERDICT extends to multi-hop QA.
Finally,
we show that the design of VERDICT is not bound
to single-hop QA tasks. Due to the page limit, we
present how VERDICT can be extended to handle
multi-hop QA tasks in Appendix E.
5.3
Error Analysis
In this section, we examine the types of errors aris-
ing from the retriever and the generator in VER-
DICT. Figure 3 shows the categorization (ˆq, ˆy)
pairs generated from VERDICT. Specifically, an
LLM judge decided whether ˆq is relevant to the
original question q, and whether ˆq is answerable
from ˆp.
First, the top-left corner of each plot in Figure 3
illustrates cases where the retrieved passage is both
relevant and answerable. The 8B model correctly
answers 92% of these instances, while stronger
Figure 3: Analysis on accuracy of generated ˆq’s and
ˆy’s from VERDICT. (i, answer correctness) Models
easily derive correct ˆq, ˆy given an answerable passage.
(ii, interpretation error rate) Impact of model scale is
more critical in discerning unanswerable passages.
models achieve even higher accuracy, reaching 98%
and 99%, respectively.
Second, the remaining L-shaped sections depict
scenarios where the passage ˆp is either irrelevant
or unanswerable. Here, the numbers represent the
interpretation error rate, where the model should
have identified that no interpretations can be de-
rived from the passage but failed to do so. While
smaller models struggle more, these errors are sub-
stantially mitigated by scaling model size.
We also discuss the stability of the LLM judge
in Appendix F.
6
Conclusion
We challenge the conventional DtV workflow for
grounding ambiguous questions in RAG and pro-
pose VERDICT, which more efficiently and ef-
fectively grounds diversification in retrieval. We
enhance the existing protocol to not only evaluate
ungrounded recall, but also assess whether inter-
pretations can be properly grounded. Evaluations
using both ungrounded and grounded metrics show
that VERDICT significantly improves grounding
while maintaining human-level diversity.
Limitations
First, while our consolidation reduces noisy feed-
back, we have not considered extreme cases where
the retriever or generator performs unreasonably
poor or adversarially. Such failures can corrupt the
initial retrieval; an adaptive mechanism that trades
retrieval breadth (via additional calls) against effi-
ciency could mitigate this, but designing an agent
that adjusts its behavior online based on feedback
quality remains open.
Second, this study focuses on grounded dis-
ambiguation for single-turn, text-only retrieval.
38789


While results on multi-hop QA using HotpotQA
(Appendix E) suggest that our method general-
izes beyond the evaluated setting, other retrieval-
augmented scenarios, such as conversational or
multimodal RAG, introduce additional require-
ments or adjustments that remain to be explored in
future work.
Finally, our grounded metrics instantiate V (·, ·)
with an LLM judge and therefore inherit standard
LLM-as-a-judge limitations (e.g., prompt sensitiv-
ity). Because each evaluation example is presented
as a simple task containing only a single interpre-
tation and a single passage, the context is small,
which substantially reduces these risks, as empiri-
cally validated in Appendix F.
References
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-rag: Learning to
retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May
7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net.
Ricardo J. G. B. Campello, Davoud Moulavi, and Jörg
Sander. 2013. Density-based clustering based on hi-
erarchical density estimates. In Advances in Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, 17th Pacific-Asia
Conference, PAKDD 2013, Gold Coast, Australia,
April 14-17, 2013, Proceedings, Part II, volume 7819
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 160–
172. Springer.
Jeremy Cole, Michael Zhang, Daniel Gillick, Julian
Eisenschlos, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Jacob Eisenstein.
2023. Selectively answering ambiguous questions.
In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
530–543, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yifan Gao,
Henghui Zhu,
Patrick Ng,
Cicero
Nogueira dos Santos, Zhiguo Wang, Feng Nan, De-
jiao Zhang, Ramesh Nallapati, Andrew O. Arnold,
and Bing Xiang. 2021. Answering ambiguous ques-
tions through generative evidence fusion and round-
trip prediction. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 3263–3276, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yeonjun In, Sungchul Kim, Ryan A. Rossi, Mehrab
Tanjim, Tong Yu, Ritwik Sinha, and Chanyoung Park.
2025. Diversify-verify-adapt: Efficient and robust
retrieval-augmented ambiguous question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-
tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1212–1233,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Gangwoo Kim, Sungdong Kim, Byeongguk Jeon, Joon-
suk Park, and Jaewoo Kang. 2023. Tree of clarifica-
tions: Answering ambiguous questions with retrieval-
augmented large language models. In Proceedings
of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 996–1009, Sin-
gapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yoonsang Lee, Xi Ye, and Eunsol Choi. 2024. Ambig-
docs: Reasoning across documents on different enti-
ties under the same name. CoRR, abs/2404.12447.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Pik-
tus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih,
Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual.
Dongfang Li, Zetian Sun, Xinshuo Hu, Zhenyu Liu,
Ziyang Chen, Baotian Hu, Aiguo Wu, and Min
Zhang. 2023a. A survey of large language models
attribution. Preprint, arXiv:2311.03731.
Xiaonan Li, Changtai Zhu, Linyang Li, Zhangyue Yin,
Tianxiang Sun, and Xipeng Qiu. 2024. LLatrieval:
LLM-verified retrieval for verifiable generation. In
Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5453–5471, Mexico
City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long,
Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. 2023b. Towards
general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281.
Nelson Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. 2023. Eval-
uating verifiability in generative search engines. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 7001–7025, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao,
and Nan Duan. 2023. Query rewriting in retrieval-
augmented large language models. In Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 5303–5315, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Luke Merrick, Danmei Xu, Gaurav Nuti, and Daniel
Campos. 2024. Arctic-embed: Scalable, efficient,
and accurate text embedding models.
Preprint,
arXiv:2405.05374.
38790


Sewon Min, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Kristina
Toutanova, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Joint
passage ranking for diverse multi-answer retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
6997–7008, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. AmbigQA: Answering am-
biguous open-domain questions. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 5783–
5797, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Zhihong Shao and Minlie Huang. 2022. Answering
open-domain multi-answer questions via a recall-
then-verify framework. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1825–
1838, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ivan Stelmakh, Yi Luan, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Ming-
Wei Chang. 2022. ASQA: Factoid questions meet
long-form answers. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 8273–8288, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Weiwei Sun, Hengyi Cai, Hongshen Chen, Pengjie Ren,
Zhumin Chen, Maarten de Rijke, and Zhaochun Ren.
2023. Answering ambiguous questions via iterative
prompting. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7669–7683, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Venktesh V, Mandeep Rathee, and Avishek Anand. 2025.
SUNAR: Semantic uncertainty based neighborhood
aware retrieval for complex QA. In Proceedings of
the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 5818–5835, Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Han Wang, Archiki Prasad, Elias Stengel-Eskin, and
Mohit Bansal. 2025. Retrieval-augmented genera-
tion with conflicting evidence. In Proceedings of the
Second Conference on Language Modeling.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V.
Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowd-
hery, and Denny Zhou. 2023.
Self-consistency
improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali,
Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.
Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling.
2024.
Corrective retrieval augmented generation.
Preprint, arXiv:2401.15884.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
38791


A
Grounding Evaluation
Here, we explain in more detail how our evaluation
protocol identified matching pairs for computing
precision and recall. We begin by reviewing the
setting of previous works and how original preci-
sion/recall has been computed in ambiguous ques-
tion answering evaluation.
Ungrounded Precision/Recall
To obtain preci-
sion, prior work determines whether each generated
interpretation is correct by comparing it against the
human interpretations ˜Q. If the generated interpre-
tation matches one of the human interpretations, it
is considered correct; otherwise, it is considered
incorrect. This can be formulated as
Precision =
1
| ˆQ|
X
ˆq∈ˆ
Q
Match

ˆq, ˜Q

,
(6)
where Match(·, ·) denotes whether two questions
are matched, or, the extended match
Match(ˆq, ˜Q) = 1

∃˜q∈˜
Q Match (ˆq, ˜q)

,
(7)
compared against the set of interpretations ˜Q. Fol-
lowing the notation from the main text, from this
point we denote such matching function as V , for
the sake of notational simplicity.
Before LLM-as-a-judge was widely adopted,
V was often instantiated with measures such as
lexical-overlap based scores, such as BLEU, ex-
ceeding some threshold τ or not,
V (ˆq, ˜q) = 1 (BLEU (ˆq, ˜q) > τ) .
(8)
While such pairwise match can be easily replaced
with querying an LLM judge, it would incur | ˆQ| ×
| ˜Q| LLM calls; for the sake of efficiency, we let the
LLM judge to directly determine the match against
the set of human interpretations as follows:
V

ˆq, ˜Q

= LLM

ˆq, ˜Q; IM

.
(9)
Similarly, recall, the proportion of ground-truth
interpretations successfully generated, is defined as
Recall =
1
| ˜Q|
X
˜q∈˜
Q
V

˜q, ˆQ

,
(10)
where whether each ˜q has been covered or not is
determined with an LLM in the same way as Eq. 9.
Grounded Precision/Recall
Our grounded eval-
uation essentially replaces V (·, ·) with new match-
ing mechanism that also counts grounding. For
grounding the precision metric, we directly verify
if the supporting passage ˆp provided along with ˆq
can answer ˆq. Thus, Eq. 6 is rewritten to consider
the ‘match’ between ˆq and ˆp as
Grounded Precision =
1
| ˆQ|
X
ˆq∈ˆ
Q
V (ˆq, ˆp) , (11)
where we replace ˆp with retrieved passages from
the corresponding retrieval pool, proxy to the whole
passages C, if such supporting passage ˆp is not
available, for example for the case of pseudo-
interpretations which are obtained independently
of retrieval. Implementation-wise, V is realized
with an LLM judge as
V (ˆq, ˆp) = LLM (ˆq, ˆp; IV) .
(12)
With the same rationale, we redefine recall as a
grounded metric
Grounded Recall =
1
| ¯Q|
X
¯q∈¯
Q
V (¯q, ˆp) ,
(13)
where we also accommodate models that do not
provide ˆp for each ˆq with ˜P, as for precision.
In Eq. 10, the ground-truth interpretation has
been approximated by human interpretations ˜Q.
To increase the recall of this proxy, we add verified
model prediction V (ˆq, ˆp) = 1.
¯Q =
n
ˆq ∈( ˆQ ∪˜Q)
 V (ˆq, ˆp)
o
.
(14)
Eq. 13 shows how ¯Q complements the human in-
terpretations ˜Q.
The prompts used to instruct the judge LLM, IM
for finding a match in a list of questions and IV for
verifying a passage can be found in Appendix G.
B
E2E Pipeline of VERDICT and DIVA
Figure 4 describes how an ambiguous question
is processed by VERDICT and DIVA (In et al.,
2025), a representative of DtV (Diversify-then-
Verify) workflow. DtV involves more sequential
steps, verifying the relevance of passages post hoc
while in VERDICT verification is integrated into
diversification, as shown on the left.
Table 9 illustrates how the difference in de-
sign complexity translates into a difference in ef-
ficiency, providing a detailed breakdown of the
38792


VERDICT (Ours)
DIVA (DtV)
Original query 
Original query 
Relaxed query
Passages
Rewrite
Retrieve
Execution w/ LLM
Triples
Embed
Chosen Interpretations, Answers
Clustering
Embeddings
Identify Type
Query and type
Pseudo-interpretations
Retrieve
Passages
Embed
Embeddings
Pruning
Pruned Passages
Verify
Infer Interpretations
Question and Answer Generation
Retriever Calls
LLM Calls
Encoding w/ embedding model
CPU workloads
Figure 4: Comparison of end-to-end workflow of VERDICT and DtV (DIVA; In et al., 2025) for handling ambiguous
question answering task. Vertical arrangement denotes sequential dependency, while calls that can run in parallel
are placed at the same horizontal level.
Component
Latency (s, ↓)
VERDICT
query rewriting
0.15
retrieval
0.5
generation
1.24
embed + clustering
0.2
DtV
pseudo-interpretations
0.44
retrieval
0.58
embed + prune
0.25
verify
0.2
generation
∼3.8
Table 9: Latency per component of VERDICT and DtV
pipelines.
average latency for both systems. The first step
of DIVA, “pseudo-interpretations,” corresponds to
“DIVA−Verification” in Table 2, which confirms
that it is indeed a lightweight baseline in isolation.
At the same time, its poor grounding shows that the
sequential nature of DtV pipelines leads to unnec-
essary retrieval, pruning, and verification.
C
More on Implementation Details
Here, we provide additional implementation de-
tails.
For main experiments, VERDICT (ours) and
RAC use top-20 passages, retrieved with relaxed
question q′ as the search query. For DtV, we use the
same encoder, Qwen, for pruning the passages and
then fix the verifier LLM to GPT-4o: The verifier
had to use the most expensive model among those
used in our evaluation, as less capable models strug-
gled to provide reliable results for long-context
inputs, severely damaging their performance. Fol-
lowing the original paper’s setting, we retrieved
top-5 passages for each pseudo-interpretation, then
finally selected top-5 among them, after pruning.
For the ablation study provided in Table 5, since
VERDICT cannot completely remove either re-
triever or generator feedback, we consider a proxy
of such ablated version where either feedback sig-
nal is substantially weakened. Specifically, we
weaken the answerability feedback by deferring
to a small model (8B) when large (GPT-4o) and
small models disagree on the answerability. For
retriever feedback, we randomize the second-phase
retrieval to suppress retriever signals.
D
Comparison with Multi-Agent Method
MADAM-RAG (Wang et al., 2025) treats the pro-
cessing of each retrieved document as a document-
level LLM agent and then uses debate to aggregate
38793


Method
| ˆQ| G-Precision G-Recall
VERDICT
3.70
81.5
58.0
MADAM-RAG, single round 4.02
76.6
57.8
Table 10: Comparison with an LLM aggregation variant
inspired by MADAM-RAG on ASQA using the LLaMA
3.3 70B backbone.
Method
| ˆQ|
G-Precision
VERDICT (ours)
2.98
91.27
DtV
2.25
77.43
Table 11: Multi-hop results on HotpotQA shows VER-
DICT is not confined to single-hop settings.
and to reconcile their outputs, using an aggregator
agent. In our setting, the closest design question is
whether the passage-level candidates from verified
diversification should likewise be consolidated by
an LLM aggregator. To isolate this choice, we use
the same candidate triples generated by VERDICT,
but replace our embedding-based clustering with
an LLM-based aggregation call that deduplicates
candidates and outputs the final set. As shown
in Table 10, this aggregation variant slightly de-
grades G-precision while yielding nearly identical
G-recall. It also incurs higher consolidation la-
tency: our embedding and clustering step takes
about 0.2 seconds, whereas the LLM-based consol-
idation call takes about 2 seconds. Full multi-round
debate, as used in MADAM-RAG, would further
increase this cost.
E
Extension to Multi-Hop QA
Here, we examine how VERDICT naturally ex-
tends to multi-hop question answering. We focus
on HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), a two-hop bench-
mark.
VERDICT keeps the efficiency of parallel single-
passage contexts with early answerability checks,
but adapts the context construction. During query
relaxation, the LLM produces two relaxed sub-
queries, q′
1 and q′
2, one per hop. We retrieve the
top-k passages for each, yielding sets Uq1 and Uq2.
We then form the Cartesian product Uq1 × Uq2,
i.e., all ordered pairs (p1, p2) with p1 ∈Uq′
1 and
p2 ∈Uq′
2. For each pair, we concatenate the two
passages to create a single context that plugs di-
rectly into the original VERDICT pipeline; the
verified diversification and consolidation phases
proceed unchanged. This construction implicitly
instantiates a concrete two-hop decomposition for
run 1
run 2
run 3
Avg.
G-Precision
92.82
92.51
92.90
92.74
Table 12: Repeated evaluation of VERDICT with the
GPT-4o backbone.
each candidate interpretation while preserving our
parallel evaluation.
The extended VERDICT handles multi-hop
queries by jointly considering two passages at a
time. It shows that the breadth-depth trade-off can
also be controlled by adjusting the granularity of
each passage itself; larger or bundled passages nat-
urally enable broader multi-hop coverage without
altering the framework.
We report | ˆQ| and G-Precision in Table 11,
where VERDICT outperforms the baseline again.
Ungrounded metrics are not reported due to the
lack of human-annotated interpretation sets in Hot-
potQA; grounded recall is omitted because it eval-
uates to 1 by construction in this setup.
F
Stability of LLM judge
In this section, we show that variability of the LLM
judge is empirically small enough to justify the
comparisons in Section 5.2. We repeat the evalua-
tion process for the GPT-4o backbone, to validate
whether virtually identical results are produced,
and we found that the maximum difference across
runs was only 0.4 percentage points, as shown in
Table 12.
G
LLM Prompts
The instruction prompts used to instantiate the var-
ious components of our method are as follows. For
reproducing baselines, we reused their prompts,
IP for generating pseudo-interpretations (In et al.,
2025) or IG for generating a list of interpretations
and answers at once (Kim et al., 2023), which can
be found in their respective papers.
Figure 5 shows the prompt for query relaxation,
and Figure 6 shows the prompt used to generate in-
terpretation and answer in VERDICT. Figure 7 and
8 present prompts used for evaluation, as discussed
in detail in Appendix A. Figure 9 also shows the
prompt used for deduplication during evaluation.
38794


Query Relaxation Prompt
Convert the given natural language question into a broad retrieval query. Keep only the essential
entities and core concepts, making the query as open as possible.
Input fields are:
Question: {original query (q)}
Output fields are:
Rewritten Question: {relaxed query (q′)}
Figure 5: Prompt IR for obtaining the relaxed query q′.
Prompt for Verified Diversification
Given an ambiguous query and one of the passages from retrieval results, provide a disambiguated
query which can be answered by the passage. Try to infer the user’s intent with the ambiguous
query and think of possible concrete, non-ambiguous rewritten questions. If you cannot find any of
them, which can be answered by the provided document, simply abstain by replying with ‘null’.
You should provide at most one subquestion, the most relevant one you can think of.
Here are the rules to follow when generating the question and answer:
1. The generated question must be a disambiguation of the original ambiguous query.
2. The question should be fully answerable from information present in given passage. Even
if the passage is relevant to the original ambiguous query, if it is not self-contained, abstain by
responding with ‘null’.
3. Make sure the question is clear and unambiguous, while clarifying the intent of the original
ambiguous question.
4. Phrases like ‘based on the provided context’, ‘according to the passage’, etc., are not allowed to
appear in the question. Similarly, questions such as “What is not mentioned about something in the
passage?” are not acceptable.
5. When addressing questions tied to a specific moment, provide the clearest possible time
reference. Avoid ambiguous questions such as “Which country has won the most recent World
Cup?” since the answer varies depending on when the question is asked.
6. The answer must be specifically based on the information provided in the passage. Your prior
knowledge should not intervene in answering the identified clarification question.
Input fields are:
Question: {ambiguous question (q)}
Passage: {passage (p)}
Output fields are:
Interpretation: {generated interpretation (ˆq)}
Answer: {generated answer (ˆy)}
Figure 6: Prompt IE for obtaining interpretation ˆq and answer ˆy with answerability feedback from the LLM.
38795


Evaluation Prompt for Ungrounded Precision/Recall
Given a list of generated disambiguated subquestions that clarify the intent of an ambiguous
question, compare them with the list of predefined subquestions and determine how many have
been successfully identified. You should return a binary label, Yes or No, for each subquestion
indicating whether it was covered or not.
Input fields are:
Question: {ambiguous question (q)}
Generated Disambiguations: {generated interpretations ( ˆQ)}
Ground-truth Disambiguations: {human-annotated interpretations ( ˜Q)}
Output fields are:
Decisions: {match (V (ˆq, ˜q)’s)}
Figure 7: Prompt IM for determining matches between ˆq’s and ˜q’s.
Evaluation Prompt for Verification
Given a question, an answer and an associated passage, decide if the passage can support the
answer, providing enough evidence to reach the answer given the question. Your answer should be
either Yes or No.
Input fields are:
Question: {interpretation (ˆq)}
Passage: {passage (ˆp)}
Output fields are:
Decision: {match (V (ˆq, ˆp))}
Figure 8: Prompt IV for determining a match between ˆq and ˆp.
Evaluation Prompt for Deduplication
Given a list of subquestions, which are derived disambiguations of an ambiguous query, remove
nearly identical duplicates and leave only distinct ones. You should provide a list of the remaining
subquestions, one at a line.
Input fields are:
Ambiguous Question: {ambiguous question (q)}
List of Disambiguated Subquestions: {interpretations ( ˆQ or ˜Q)}
Output fields are:
List of Unique Subquestions: {deduplicated interpretations }
Figure 9: Prompt ID for removing (near-)duplicates in a list of interpretations for an ambiguous question.
38796
