Title: 2026.findings-acl.1959.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.1959.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:36:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 39311–39331 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# SQLAgent: Learning to Explore Before Generating as a Data Engineer 

Wenjia Jiang 1, Yiwei Wang 2, Boyan Han 1, Joey Tianyi Zhou 3,4 , Chi Zhang 1*1AGI Lab, Westlake University, China 2University of California, Merced, USA 

> 3

CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 

> 4

IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 

> https://github.com/Westlake-AGI-Lab/SQLAgent

Abstract 

Large Language Models have recently shown impressive capabilities in reasoning and code generation, making them promising tools for natural language interfaces to relational databases. However, existing approaches of-ten fail to generalize in complex, real-world settings due to the highly database-specific na-ture of SQL reasoning, which requires deep familiarity with unique schemas, ambiguous semantics, and intricate join paths. To ad-dress this challenge, we introduce a novel two-stage LLM-based framework that decou-ples knowledge acquisition from query gener-ation. In the Exploration Stage, the system autonomously constructs a database-specific knowledge base by navigating the schema with a Monte Carlo Tree Search–inspired strategy, generating triplets of schema fragments, exe-cutable queries, and natural language descrip-tions as usage examples. In the Deployment Stage, a dual-agent system leverages the col-lected knowledge as in-context examples to iteratively retrieve relevant information and generate accurate SQL queries in response to user questions. This design enables the agent to proactively familiarize itself with unseen databases and handle complex, multi-step rea-soning. Extensive experiments on large-scale benchmarks demonstrate that our approach sig-nificantly improves accuracy over strong base-lines, highlighting its effectiveness and gener-alizability. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated remarkable capabilities in complex reason-ing tasks(OpenAI, 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023; Mir-chandani et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Meta Funda-mental AI Research (FAIR) Diplomacy Team et al., 2022). As high-value information resides primar-ily in relational databases(Verbitski et al., 2017; 

> *Corresponding author.

Yavuz et al., 2018), leveraging LLMs to interact with structured data has gained significant atten-tion. This interest drives Text-to-SQL research, which translates natural language questions into executable SQL queries to democratize data ac-cess(Liu et al., 2025; Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Koutrika, 2023; Kobayashi et al., 2025; Malekpour et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2022). The primary objective involves bridging the gap between human language and databases without requiring users to master complex syntax. However, current approaches struggle to gener-alize to complex scenarios(Lei et al., 2025). Per-formance often drops on real-world databases and reveals a significant generalization gap(Pourreza and Rafiei, 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Talaei et al., 2024). This limitation arises because SQL rea-soning is inherently database-specific rather than portable. Valid queries depend strictly on unique schema structures unlike generic code generation. Consequently, models face challenges in navigating intricate schemas and resolving semantic ambigu-ity based on specific column names. Furthermore, reasoning requires precise alignment with unique database join paths and relationships. Without prior familiarity with the database, a generic pre-trained model struggles to navigate the unique structure and meaning within a new database(Lei et al., 2025). In contrast, human ex-perts succeed by first building a deep familiarity with the database’s unique schema and relation-ships. This core insight motivates our approach: a preliminary process designed to build this foun-dational knowledge before attempting the final translation task. To achieve this goal, we pro-pose a novel LLM-based agent framework that operates in two key stages. First, the framework autonomously explores an unfamiliar database to generate a rich, database-specific knowledge base. Subsequently, this knowledge is provided to the agent as in-context examples(Dong et al., 2024; 

39311 Rubin et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022b). This pro-cess guides the generation of the final, complex SQL query. The Exploration Stage autonomously constructs a structured, database-specific knowledge base. The core objective of this stage is to generate a rich set of usage examples for each key compo-nent of the database schema, such as its tables and columns. Each example is formalized as a triplet: a schema sub-structure, a corresponding executable SQL query, and its natural language de-scription. To systematically generate these triplets across the entire schema, we first represent the database as a traversable tree structure, where enti-ties like tables and columns are organized as nodes. This tree provides a map for our exploration. To generate triplets, the agent need explore this tree to find and combine meaningful nodes into valid queries. To this end, We then employ a search strat-egy inspired by Monte Carlo Tree Search(Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006; Coulom, 2007), guided by an Agent that acts as the core reasoning engine. The agent intelligently navigates this tree to build and test new queries. It achieves this by selecting a series of actions, such as introducing a join or adding a filter. Each successful exploration path re-sults in a new triplet. These triplets are collected to build our knowledge base, enabling the next stage to better write accurate SQL queries. Overall, this process allows the system to proactively familiar-ize itself with an unknown database without any manual intervention. In the Deployment Stage, our goal is to effec-tively utilize the knowledge from the exploration phase to handle complex user queries. To achieve this, we introduce a dual-agent framework where an InfoAgent and a GenAgent collaborate with dis-tinct roles. The InfoAgent grounds the user query in the database schema, identifying the most rele-vant tables and columns through semantic search over pre-computed column embeddings and LLM-driven context expansion to infer implicit join keys. The GenAgent then retrieves the most semantically relevant (S, Q, U ) triplets from the knowledge base and uses them as database-specific in-context ex-amples to guide the final SQL generation. If the generated query is unsuccessful, execution feed-back is passed back to the InfoAgent, which prunes the schema context and retrieves additional candi-dates, prompting a new generation cycle. The two agents thus collaborate in an iterative loop, contin-uously refining the SQL query through a cycle of context refinement, example retrieval, generation, and execution feedback. This collaborative, multi-step design allows our system to deconstruct the problem, leading to high accuracy and reliability. To validate the effectiveness of our approach, we conducted extensive experiments showing that our method significantly outperforms strong baselines on complex, large-scale benchmarks. Our main contributions are: 1. We propose a novel two-stage LLM-based framework that decouples knowledge acquisi-tion from query generation. 2. We develop an autonomous, agent-driven ex-ploration strategy that constructs a structured, executable knowledge base without requiring manual annotations. 3. We introduce a dual-agent reasoning mecha-nism that iteratively retrieves and integrates in-context examples to generate accurate and executable SQL queries. 

2 Related Work 

LLM-based Text-to-SQL Methods. Research in Text-to-SQL has progressed from early neural parsers to modern LLM-driven approaches (Shi et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2022). Seminal neural methods introduced techniques like graph-based encoders to leverage database schema (Wang et al., 2020) and constrained decoding to ensure syntactic correctness (Scholak et al., 2021). With the advent of large language models, the field has seen signif-icant advancements. Numerous fine-tuning meth-ods (Li et al., 2024) and advanced LLM-prompting techniques (Dong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023; Talaei et al., 2024; Pourreza and Rafiei, 2024; Gao et al., 2024) have achieved strong performance on established benchmarks. However, these approaches still contend with challenges such as limited context windows and adapting to unseen database domains. 

Multi-Agent for Code Generation. The in-tersection of generative models and interactive problem-solving has spurred a surge in agent-based frameworks designed to enhance the reasoning ca-pabilities of language models, particularly for code generation (Yao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Shinn et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024). To overcome the limits of a single model, a prominent 39312 strategy is to deploy multiple agents in coordinated roles. In this multi-agent paradigm, agents special-ize and interact, often through patterns like coopera-tive decomposition (Li et al., 2023a) or hierarchical task delegation (langgenius, 2023). To make these interactions more robust, other works have focused on designing special action spaces to standardize agent operations (Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). Inspired by these successes, our method employs a similar strategy with dedicated explorer and generator agents for text-to-SQL translation. 

3 Methodology 

The core insight behind our approach is that an agent familiar with a database generates SQL far more reliably than one reasoning over raw schema definitions alone. We therefore propose a two-stage framework to generalize Text-to-SQL to unfamiliar enterprise databases. An Exploration Stage au-tonomously constructs a database-specific knowl-edge base before any user query arrives. A sub-sequent Deployment Stage employs a dual-agent framework to leverage this knowledge for accurate SQL synthesis. We first introduce the compact schema representation that underpins both stages in §4.1, then detail the exploration process in §4.2, and finally describe the deployment mechanism in §4.3. 

3.1 Database Schema Representation 

Large-scale enterprise databases commonly exhibit structural redundancy. Time-based sharding pro-duces hundreds of tables with identical schemas, such as daily logs or hourly snapshots. Model-ing each table independently would attach every table node to its own set of field nodes, yielding 

O(N × M ) edges for N sharded tables and M

shared fields, making the schema intractably large for LLM-guided traversal. To address this, we represent the relational schema as a traversable, tree-like graph in which databases, tables, and fields are distinct nodes con-nected by typed edges. The key abstraction within this structure is the Shared Field Group . For-mally, let T = {T1, T 2, . . . , T n} be the set of tables in a database. Each table Ti is character-ized by its schema signature Si = {(fi,j , τ i,j )}mj=1 ,where fi,j and τi,j denote the name and data type of the j-th field, respectively. We define a Shared Field Group Gk = {Ti ∈ T | Hash (sort (Si)) = 

Hash (sort (Sk)) }, where sort (·) renders the signa-ture invariant to column ordering and Hash (·) pro-duces a unique 128-bits identifier for each struc-tural pattern. Each table then establishes a single link to its corresponding Shared Field Group rather than individual connections to all its field nodes. This reduces edge complexity from O(N × M )

to O(N + M ), streamlines LLM-guided traversal, and improves the interpretability of inter-table rela-tionships. The identification algorithm is detailed in Appendix C and Appendix D. 

3.2 Exploration Stage: LLM-Guided Tree Search 

The Exploration Stage aims to systematically ac-quire prior knowledge about the target database before query time. Concretely, we populate a knowledge base with triplets (S, Q, U ), where S

is a schema sub-structure, Q is an executable SQL query over that sub-structure, and U is the aligned natural language description. During deployment, these triplets serve as database-specific in-context examples that ground query generation in verified schema patterns. Generating diverse, valid triplets across aschema with hundreds of tables and thousands of columns is combinatorially challenging. A tree-structured search offers a principled solution by incrementally expanding schema nodes and di-recting the exploration budget toward productive regions. Monte Carlo Tree Search (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006) provides the structural inspira-tion for this design. Standard MCTS, however, relies on scalar rewards propagated via the Upper Confidence Bound for Trees. This assumption does not hold for SQL reasoning: query validity is bi-nary at execution time, while the semantic quality of a query reflects how meaningfully it exercises the schema’s relational structure, a property that is continuous and context-dependent. We therefore replace the UCT policy with an LLM-as-Policy-and-Evaluator paradigm. The LLM encodes error traces and schema semantics to emit rich natural-language feedback that distinguishes syntactically invalid paths from semantically unproductive ones, providing a more informative guidance signal than sparse numerical rewards. The exploration continues until a predefined ter-mination condition is met, namely a target number of valid triplets or a maximum iteration budget. The process consists of four phases, illustrated in Figure 1. 

LLM-Guided Selection and Expansion. At 39313 DB Schema Schema Table Table Table Group Field Field  

> A database is composed of one or more schemas. A schema serves as a logical container for a collection of tables. When multiple tables share common attributes, use
> Group Node to perform aggregation.

Schema Representation Exploration Process   

> 1.Selection 2.Expansion 3.Simulation
> SQL Gen. Query Gen.
> 4.Backpropagation
> Structural Info
> SQL
> Query
> Triplet Knowledge
> Stores related triples in table nodes.
> Balancing Diversity and Semantic Integrity

Figure 1: Database Representation and Exploration Stage. The left panel illustrates our schema representation: the Shared Field Group consolidates structurally identical tables into a single canonical node, reducing schema complexity from O(N × M ) to O(N + M ). The right panel depicts the LLM-guided MCTS-inspired tree search, which traverses this compact representation through four phases, namely selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation, to accumulate a structured knowledge base of (S, Q, U ) triplets. 

each node in the search tree, the LLM receives the current query state, which is a sequence of prior actions, and the available schema context, which is a simplified JSON representation of reachable tables and columns. Its task is to select the most promising next action from a discrete action space that includes options such as Select Column , Add Constraint , and Apply Aggregation . This selec-tion directly creates a new child node, expanding the tree toward more complex and semantically di-verse query structures. This single reasoned step combines selection and expansion, ensuring broad coverage of database operations and schema inter-actions. A full description of the action space is provided in Appendix E. 

SQL Simulation. Each expanded node repre-sents a candidate schema sub-structure whose prac-tical utility can only be confirmed through exe-cution against the live database. From this node, an LLM generates a complete SQL query whose structure is semantically consistent with the current schema context. To promote meaningful explo-ration, the model is instructed to prioritize columns with associated documentation and to restrict se-lection to schema nodes not yet incorporated in the current path, retaining join-key columns as an exception to preserve relational connectivity. As a concrete example, if the node contains age ,

height , and gender from a users table, the LLM might generate SELECT * FROM users WHERE age > 20 AND gender = ’Male’ along with a natural language description stating that the query retrieves all male users older than 20. The resulting query undergoes a two-stage val-idation. First, a SQL parser checks syntactic cor-rectness. Second, the query is executed against the live database to verify runtime validity. A simu-lation succeeds only if the query is syntactically valid, executes without runtime errors, and returns a non-empty, non-trivial result set. On success, an LLM generates the natural language component U

from S and Q, completing the triplet. Because each example is grounded in a real schema sub-structure and validated against live data, this approach guar-antees high semantic alignment among S, Q, and 

U .

Backpropagation. Without memory of prior attempts, the search would revisit unproductive schema paths repeatedly, exhausting the explo-ration budget on regions already proven fruitless. We address this by propagating outcomes back along the search path to guide future iterations. For a successful triplet (S, Q, U ), positive feedback is recorded on all entity nodes, that is, the tables and columns that contributed to the query, enriching each schema component with a history of produc-tive usage. For failed explorations, negative feed-back lowers the selection priority of that path, dis-couraging repetition of unproductive combinations. In subsequent selection steps, the LLM prompt is augmented with this accumulated node-level feed-back, creating a self-refining exploration process that progressively steers the search toward valid, se-mantically rich queries. Once the knowledge base 39314 is sufficiently populated, the system transitions to the Deployment Stage, which draws on this accu-mulated knowledge to ground query generation in verified schema experience. 

3.3 Deployment Stage: Dual-Agent SQL Synthesis 

To bridge the semantic gap between a user’s natural language query and a complex, unfamiliar database schema, we propose a dual-agent framework illus-trated in Figure 2. The InfoAgent handles schema grounding and context management; the GenA-gent performs knowledge-driven SQL synthesis. The two agents collaborate through an iterative re-finement loop in which execution feedback drives progressive context pruning and query improve-ment. 

InfoAgent: Schema Grounding & Context Man-agement. A user query rarely names database columns directly, and naive keyword matching over a schema with hundreds of tables frequently misses critical join keys or misidentifies relevant columns. To address this, the InfoAgent constructs a precise, executable schema context in two steps. The first step is Schema Grounding . To make the schema semantically searchable, each column is serialized into a descriptive string by concate-nating its name, data type, and any available doc-umentation comment. This string is then encoded into a high-dimensional vector using a sentence-embedding model, producing a pre-computed em-bedding index over the entire schema. At query time, the InfoAgent extracts semantic keywords from the user query and retrieves the top-k most relevant columns by performing a similarity search against this index. The second step is Context Expansion . The ini-tial top-k set is often incomplete, as it surfaces the directly relevant columns while omitting the join keys necessary to link them into an executable query. The InfoAgent therefore prompts an LLM to act as a database expert, providing it with both the user query and the preliminary schema set. The LLM reasons about the relational dependencies among the retrieved components and infers any logically necessary additions. For instance, if the initial retrieval surfaces a user_name column from a users table alongside an order_amount column from an orders table, the LLM identifies and adds the user_id and customer_id keys required to join the two tables. The resulting schema con-text, which contains both directly retrieved and logically inferred components, is then transmitted to the GenAgent. 

GenAgent: Knowledge-Driven Synthesis. 

Even with an accurate schema context, generating complex SQL for an unfamiliar database is difficult without concrete usage examples that demonstrate how the schema components interact. The GenA-gent addresses this by grounding generation in the triplet knowledge base built during the Exploration Stage. It generates a retrieval embedding by jointly encoding the user’s natural language question and the InfoAgent-provided schema context through a code-embedding model. Encoding the question alone would surface triplets that match its intent but may involve unrelated schema structures. By incorporating the schema context into the embedding, retrieval is directed toward examples that are both semantically relevant and structurally compatible with the target database. A similarity search is then performed against the pre-computed embeddings of the SQL component Q in each stored triplet, retrieving the top-k triplets whose query vectors are most semantically similar to the current request. These triplets, which encode verified schema patterns alongside their natural language descriptions, serve as database-specific few-shot examples. The GenAgent then constructs a final prompt by combining the user query, the refined schema context, and these retrieved examples to produce the SQL query. Example prompts and agent interaction details for both agents are given in Appendix B. 

Collaborative Refinement Loop. A single-pass generation is rarely sufficient for complex enter-prise queries, where an incomplete schema context or an undetected join dependency can invalidate the entire result. We address this with a collabora-tive refinement loop in which the two agents iter-atively narrow the schema context and correct the query until execution succeeds. After the GenA-gent produces a query, it is executed against the live database. If execution fails, the InfoAgent responds with two concurrent corrective actions. First, it prunes the schema context by removing components that were present in the context but absent from the generated query, thereby narrow-ing the candidate set and reducing noise for the next iteration. Second, it re-analyzes the user query for secondary semantic keywords that the initial grounding step may have overlooked, using them 39315 InfoAgent GenAgent 

> List every crypto address, the year it was last active on the blockchain, and the total number of transaction outputs it has.

Database 

Knowledge & Triplet 

User SQL Code 

Subtree SQL Query  

> Information transmission Result Return Input/Output
> … SELECT "address" FROM Transaction_Values ORDER BY "total_value" DESC LIMIT 1;
> Search for Relevant Columns and Tables
> Exchange Information and Query Commands
> Searching for Prior Knowledge in the Exploration Phase
> Query Database
> Reasoning Loop
> Runtime Loop

Figure 2: Deployment Stage: Dual-Agent SQL Synthesis. The InfoAgent grounds the user query in the database schema via semantic search over pre-computed column embeddings and LLM-driven context expansion. The GenAgent retrieves verified (S, Q, U ) triplets from the exploration knowledge base using a joint query-and-schema embedding and synthesizes the final SQL using them as few-shot examples. Their collaborative refinement loop, in which execution feedback simultaneously prunes the schema context and expands overlooked candidates, consistently outperforms a single-agent baseline across all iteration budgets. 

to recall additional candidate tables and columns. This dual response ensures that each failed itera-tion simultaneously tightens the existing context and expands the candidate set in a targeted direc-tion. If execution succeeds, a Semantic Fidelity Check verifies that the query result aligns with the user’s original intent. This cycle repeats until a valid, semantically aligned query is confirmed or the iteration limit is reached. The formal algorithm is provided in Appendix F. 

4 Experiments 

To validate the effectiveness and generalizability of SQLAgent, we conduct extensive experiments on two benchmarks: Spider 2.0-Snow and BIRD. We compare against strong baselines, analyze per-component contributions through ablation, and study sensitivity to key hyperparameters and LLM backbones. Full experimental details are provided in Appendix A. 

4.1 Experiment Setup Benchmark. We evaluate on Spider 2.0-Snow (Lei et al., 2025), an enterprise-level benchmark com-prising 547 examples across more than 150 databases with approximately 800 columns each. Following the benchmark protocol (Lei et al., 2025), query difficulty is classified by token count into three tiers: Easy (fewer than 80 tokens), Medium (80–159 tokens), and Hard (160 or more tokens). 

Evaluation Metrics. We report Execution Ac-curacy (EX) (Li et al., 2023b; Yu et al., 2018; Lei et al., 2025), which compares the execution results of predicted and ground-truth SQL queries on a given database instance, accounting for the exis-tence of multiple valid queries for a single question. To account for output stochasticity, we also report PASS@ K, which measures whether a correct result is produced within K runs. Efficiency is quantified by the average number of LLM calls and database (DB) executions per query. 

Baselines. We compare against systems spanning multiple paradigms: Spider-Agent applies multi-agent task decomposition; Re-FoRCE combines schema retrieval with itera-tive self-refinement; AlphaSQL and MARS-SQL are reinforcement-learning-based methods; and CHASE-SQL is a training-free chain-of-thought ap-proach. Our internal ablation baseline implements 39316 a self-refinement mechanism (Deng et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2018): it constructs a textual schema index, retrieves the most relevant DDL, and iteratively refines the SQL using execution feedback until a valid query is produced or a stopping criterion is met. 

4.2 Results and Analysis Comparative Results. We evaluate SQLAgent against all baselines to establish its overall ef-fectiveness. Table 1 presents per-difficulty and efficiency results against Spider-Agent and Re-FoRCE. Our full method achieves an overall EX of 25.78% , surpassing ReFoRCE (20.84%) and Spider-Agent (12.98%). We additionally compare against RL-based methods (AlphaSQL: 7.28%, MARS-SQL: 5.30%) and a training-free reasoning method (CHASE-SQL: 1.28%), confirming that SQLAgent outperforms all baseline categories. The advantage is most pronounced on the Hard subset, where our method achieves 12.21% while com-peting methods largely fail. Hard queries require multi-step join reasoning and database-specific op-erations that are invisible in DDL alone; the knowl-edge base directly supplies the verified patterns that make such queries tractable. A conceptual com-parison with other inference-time frameworks ( e.g. ,Din-SQL, C3, Chess) is provided in Appendix G, and an analysis of failure modes in Appendix H.2. 

Ablation Study. To isolate each component’s contribution, we conduct a stepwise ablation. The Baseline achieves 14.26% overall EX and scores 0% on Hard queries. Adding the Exploration Stage (w/ Exp. Stage) improves overall accuracy to 20.10% , confirming the value of the proactively constructed knowledge base. The full method, incorporating the dual-agent Deployment Stage, reaches 25.78% . In terms of efficiency, our full method averages 5.2 LLM calls and 3.6 DB calls, notably fewer DB interactions than ReFoRCE (3.9) despite higher accuracy, as the structured dual-agent reasoning avoids redundant query execu-tions. A fine-grained component-degradation ab-lation across five iterative rounds is provided in Appendix I. A notable finding from that study is that removing context pruning causes accuracy to degrade in later refinement rounds rather than sta-bilize, confirming that accumulated unused schema items introduce noise that can corrupt initially cor-rect queries. 

Cost-Amortization Analysis. We verify whether the Exploration Stage’s initialization over-head is justified at deployment scale. Table 2 quan-tifies token costs on a representative large database (∼800 columns). Direct context input fails imme-diately due to context window overflow. Chun-ked retrieval incurs no upfront cost but demands 76.2k tokens per query. SQLAgent’s one-time ex-ploration cost of 467k tokens is fully amortized after just 8 queries , after which its per-query cost of 16.4k tokens is 4.6× cheaper than chunked re-trieval. At scale (100 queries), our approach saves over 5.5M tokens while simultaneously achieving a 

14.48% absolute improvement in EX, representing a favorable trade-off for any enterprise deployment scenario. Scalability of the Shared Field Group abstraction is further analyzed in Appendix J. 

Dynamic Exploration vs. Static Semantic View. The cost analysis above establishes that the Exploration Stage is efficient at scale; we now ver-ify that its execution-grounded approach is also qualitatively superior to cheaper static alternatives. A natural alternative is to construct a knowledge base by prompting an LLM to synthesize schema descriptions from DDL alone, without any live database interaction. While this incurs no execu-tion cost, it relies entirely on the model’s ability to infer schema semantics from structural definitions. We implement this static semantic view baseline using the same GPT-4o backbone to isolate the contribution of execution feedback. As shown in Table 3, the static baseline achieves only 8.22% overall EX and scores 0.00% on Hard queries. The fundamental limitation is that many database-specific constraints are invisible in DDL and can only be discovered through runtime execu-tion. For instance, the UNNEST operation required for nested VARIANT fields is not expressed in the schema definition yet is essential for execution. Our dynamic exploration retains only genuinely ex-ecutable schema combinations by using execution success and failure as objective ground truth, yield-ing a 17.56% absolute overall improvement and enabling non-zero performance on Hard queries. 

Performance During Iteration. We examine how accuracy evolves across refinement rounds to assess the contribution of the Exploration Stage knowledge base. Figure 3a tracks EX as a function of the iteration budget, comparing the framework with and without the knowledge base. With the knowledge base (red curve), accuracy rises mono-tonically from 5.5% to a peak of 25.8% at four iter-ations: each cycle allows the agents to retrieve pro-gressively more relevant examples and refine the 39317 Table 1: Performance Comparison on Spider 2.0-Snow. SQLAgent achieves 25.78% overall EX, outperforming all baselines with the most pronounced gain on Hard queries (12.21%). The full method also requires fewer DB calls than ReFoRCE despite higher accuracy. EX (%) is reported per difficulty level; efficiency is measured by average LLM and Database (DB) calls per query. 

Method Strategy EX (%) Efficiency 

Easy Medium Hard Overall LLM Calls DB Calls Spider-Agent Agentic 24.22 11.38 6.94 12.98 11 3ReFoRCE Consensus 49.22 17.00 5.23 20.84 3.5 3.9 SQLAgent Baseline 32.81 14.57 0.00 14.26 3.0 4.2 w/ Exp. Stage 41.40 19.03 5.81 20.10 4.1 5.2 Full Method 57.81 18.62 12.21 25.78 5.2 3.6    

> Table 2: Cost-Amortization Analysis. Token costs (k tokens) and Execution Accuracy for a representative large database ( ∼800 columns). “Initial” is a one-time exploration cost; “Avg./Query” is the per-query inference cost. The exploration overhead is fully amortized after just 8 queries.

Strategy Initial Avg./Query Total@10 Total@100 EX (%) 

Direct Input — >Window Failed 0.00 Chunked Retrieval 0 76.2k 762k 7.62M 11.30 SQLAgent (Ours) 467k 16.4k 631k 2.11M 25.78 

schema context. Without the knowledge base (blue curve), accuracy plateaus at 14.1% and sharply degrades after five iterations. Without validated priors, iterative refinement becomes unstable; an accumulation of redundant feedback can lead the agents to revise an initially correct query into an in-correct one. A detailed case study illustrating how the knowledge base resolves complex structures such as nested VARIANT fields and time-sharded relations is provided in Appendix H. 

Hyperparameter Analysis. We examine two critical hyperparameters: schema retrieval top-k

and LLM temperature. The iteration budget of five rounds is supported by Figure 3a, where perfor-mance stabilizes after round four, indicating that additional iterations yield no further benefit. As shown in the right panel of Figure 3b, our method’s accuracy rapidly improves and saturates at k=3 ;beyond this, additional columns yield diminishing returns at higher computational cost. By contrast, the baseline requires a larger k but is constrained by the LLM context window. We therefore set 

k=3 . For temperature (middle panel), a value of 0.7 enables more varied and effective search terms, maximizing EX for the GPT model (Peeperkorn et al., 2024). We set temperature to 0.7 in all exper-iments. 

Generalization on BIRD. To verify that SQLA-gent’s gains are not specific to Spider 2.0-Snow, we evaluate on the BIRD benchmark (Li et al., 2023c) dev set. Unlike Spider 2.0-Snow, which features heavily sharded enterprise schemas with hundreds of columns per table, BIRD covers a broader variety of real-world databases with more moderate schema complexity and richer natural lan-guage variation, making it a complementary test of generalizability. SQLAgent achieves 70.53% 

EX, outperforming ReFoRCE at 57.0%, MARS-SQL at 66.8%, and AlphaSQL at 69.7%. This consistent advantage across two structurally dis-tinct benchmarks confirms the generalizability of the two-stage exploration-deployment framework. 

LLM Backbone Analysis. To verify that our framework’s gains are model-agnostic, we com-pare the Baseline against the full SQLAgent across four LLM backbones, reporting per-query token cost and EX@8 (OpenAI, 2023; Qwen et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023b). As shown in Table 4, our framework delivers a robust absolute gain of approximately +10% across the more pow-erful models. The improvement is especially pronounced for the smaller Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct model, where our method more than doubles EX@8 from 7.12% to 14.99% , demonstrating that 39318 Table 3: Dynamic Exploration vs. Static Semantic View. Replacing live execution feedback with LLM-only DDL inference completely fails on Hard queries. Dynamic exploration achieves a 17.56% absolute overall improvement by retaining only genuinely executable schema combinations. 

Strategy Exec. Feedback? Easy Medium Hard Overall 

Static Semantic View No 20.31 10.07 0.00 8.22 SQLAgent (Ours) Yes 57.81 18.62 12.21 25.78 

Improvement +37.50 +8.55 +12.21 +17.56 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8     

> Max Iterations Times
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Execution Accuracy (EX, %)
> w/ Exploration w/o Exploration
> (a) Performance During Iteration. 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0

LLM temperature     

> 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
> Avg. Execution Accuracy  GPT Qwen 1357

Hyperparameter topk   

> 0.0 0.1 0.2
> Avg. Execution Accuracy  Baseline Ours (b) Analysis of Two Key Hyperparameters.

Figure 3: Analysis of the Exploration Stage and Key Hyperparameters. Left : EX as a function of iteration budget. The knowledge base (red) drives accuracy from 5.5% to 25.8% at four iterations; without it (blue), accuracy plateaus at 14.1% and degrades after five iterations as unguided refinement destabilizes initially correct queries. 

Middle : LLM temperature sensitivity: a temperature of 0.7 maximizes EX for the GPT model. Right : Schema retrieval top-k analysis: performance saturates at k=3 for our method, while the Baseline requires larger k but is limited by the context window. Table 4: Performance Across LLM Backbones. 

SQLAgent delivers a consistent ∼+10% absolute EX@8 gain over the baseline across powerful models, and more than doubles performance for Qwen2.5-7B, confirming model-agnostic generalizability. Per-query cost (k to-kens) and EX@8 (%) are reported.                     

> LLM Cost EX@8 (%) ∆
> Baseline Ours Qwen2.5-7B 20.8k 7.12 14.99 +7.87 GPT-4o 15.2k 21.57 31.99 +10.42 GPT-5 12.5k 22.49 32.90 +10.70 Claude-Sonnet-4.0 11.6k 29.97 39.12 +9.15

the structured exploration-deployment architecture can effectively compensate for reduced model ca-pacity. An analysis of the knowledge retrieval strat-egy is provided in Appendix K. Together, these results indicate that schema familiarity has been largely addressed by the Exploration Stage; anal-ysis of remaining failure cases in Appendix H.2 further shows that the principal bottlenecks now lie in multi-step logical reasoning and fine-grained value alignment. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduce SQLAgent, a framework that em-ulates a human data engineer’s problem-solving process. By first autonomously exploring a database to build context-specific knowledge and then leveraging it for deployment, SQLAgent pro-vides a scalable and adaptive solution for large-scale, enterprise-level databases where conven-tional methods falter. Extensive experiments vali-date this approach, demonstrating its effectiveness and robustness across challenging benchmarks. Ul-timately, our work represents a significant step towards creating more autonomous and capable agents for data interaction, advancing the goal of democratizing access to complex structured data. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 6250070674) and by the Zhejiang Leading Innova-tive and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program (2024R01007). 39319 Limitations 

The Exploration Stage incurs a one-time initial-ization cost that may not amortize effectively in cold-start scenarios involving numerous distinct, one-off databases. The framework also requires a live, executable database environment: it is inappli-cable in DDL-only settings, and exploratory query execution carries data exposure risks that we rec-ommend mitigating with read-only credentials and organizational access controls. Finally, the Shared Field Group abstraction offers limited benefit on highly denormalized schemas, exploration qual-ity is bounded by the backbone LLM’s reasoning capacity, and generated SQL may contain logical errors despite the refinement loop, making human oversight advisable in critical deployments. 

References 

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, and 1 others. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelli-gence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 .Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schaerli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Teaching large language models to self-debug. In The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics .Rémi Coulom. 2007. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In Comput-ers and Games , pages 72–83, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Minghang Deng, Ashwin Ramachandran, Canwen Xu, Lanxiang Hu, Zhewei Yao, Anupam Datta, and Hao Zhang. 2025. Reforce: A text-to-sql agent with self-refinement, consensus enforcement, and column ex-ploration. Preprint , arXiv:2502.00675. Naihao Deng, Yulong Chen, and Yue Zhang. 2022. Re-cent advances in text-to-SQL: A survey of what we have and what we expect. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Lin-guistics , pages 2166–2187, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. International Committee on Computational Linguistics. Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. 2024. A survey on in-context learning. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1107–1128, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xuemei Dong, Chao Zhang, Yuhang Ge, Yuren Mao, Yunjun Gao, Jinshu Lin, Dongfang Lou, and 1 others. 2023. C3: Zero-shot text-to-sql with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07306 .Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, Xiuyu Sun, Yichen Qian, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Text-to-sql empowered by large language models: A benchmark evaluation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 17(5):1132–1145. Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2019. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(3):535–547. George Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Georgia Koutrika. 2023. A survey on deep learning approaches for text-to-sql. The VLDB Journal , 32(4):905–936. Hideo Kobayashi, Wuwei Lan, Peng Shi, Shuaichen Chang, Jiang Guo, Henghui Zhu, Zhiguo Wang, and Patrick Ng. 2025. You only read once (YORO): Learning to internalize database knowledge for text-to-SQL. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1889–1901, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. 2006. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In Machine Learning: ECML 2006 , pages 282–293, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. LangChain AI. 2024. LangGraph: Building stateful, multi-actor applications with LLMs .langgenius. 2023. Dify: An open-source LLM app de-velopment platform .Fangyu Lei, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Ruisheng Cao, Dongchan Shin, Hongjin Su, Zhaoqing Suo, Hongcheng Gao, Wenjing Hu, Pengcheng Yin, Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, Ruoxi Sun, Qian Liu, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. 2025. Spider 2.0: Evaluating language models on real-world enterprise text-to-sql workflows. Preprint , arXiv:2411.07763. Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. 2023a. Camel: Communicative agents for "mind" ex-ploration of large language model society. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Haoyang Li, Jing Zhang, Hanbing Liu, Ju Fan, Xi-aokang Zhang, Jun Zhu, Renjie Wei, Hongyan Pan, Cuiping Li, and Hong Chen. 2024. Codes: Towards building open-source language models for text-to-sql. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data ,2(3):1–28. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guoliang 39320 Li, Kevin C.C. Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. 2023b. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, and 1 others. 2023c. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:42330–42357. Xinyu Liu, Shuyu Shen, Boyan Li, Peixian Ma, Run-zhi Jiang, Yuxin Zhang, Ju Fan, Guoliang Li, Nan Tang, and Yuyu Luo. 2025. A survey of text-to-sql in the era of llms: Where are we, and where are we going? IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 37(10):5735–5754. Mohammadhossein Malekpour, Nour Shaheen, Foutse Khomh, and Amine Mhedhbi. 2024. Towards op-timizing sql generation via llm routing. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.04319. Meta Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) Diplomacy Team, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, An-drew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, and 1 oth-ers. 2022. Human-level play in the game of Diplo-macy by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science , 378(6624):1067–1074. Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Kan-ishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. 2023. Large language models as general pattern machines. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721 .Neo4j, Inc. 2024. Neo4j Graph Database . Accessed: 2025-12-20. OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. Technical re-port, OpenAI. OpenAI. 2024a. Hello gpt-4o. Accessed: 2025-12-20. OpenAI. 2024b. New embedding models and api up-dates. Accessed: 2024-05-20. Max Peeperkorn, Tom Kouwenhoven, Dan Brown, and Anna Jordanous. 2024. Is temperature the creativ-ity parameter of large language models? Preprint ,arXiv:2405.00492. Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. 2024. Din-sql: Decomposed in-context learning of text-to-sql with self-correction. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 36. Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, and 25 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. 2022. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 2655–2671, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2021. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Liang Shi, Zhengju Tang, Nan Zhang, Xiaotong Zhang, and Zhi Yang. 2025. A survey on employing large language models for text-to-sql tasks. ACM Comput. Surv. , 58(2). Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2024. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36. Shayan Talaei, Mohammadreza Pourreza, Yu-Chen Chang, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Amin Saberi. 2024. Chess: Contextual harnessing for efficient sql synthe-sis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16755 .Alexandre Verbitski, Anurag Gupta, Debanjan Saha, Murali Brahmadesam, Kamal Gupta, Raman Mit-tal, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Sandor Maurice, Tengiz Kharatishvili, and Xiaofeng Bao. 2017. Amazon aurora: Design considerations for high throughput cloud-native relational databases. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Conference on Man-agement of Data , SIGMOD ’17, page 1041–1052, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Bailin Wang, Richard Shin, Xiaodong Liu, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. 2020. RAT-SQL: Relation-aware schema encoding and linking for text-to-SQL parsers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 7567–7578, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bing Wang, Changyu Ren, Jian Yang, Xinnian Liang, Jiaqi Bai, Qian-Wen Zhang, Zhao Yan, and Zhoujun Li. 2023a. Mac-sql: Multi-agent collaboration for text-to-sql. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11242 .Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2023b. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language 39321 models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2609–2634. Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, and 5 others. 2024. OpenDevin: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Gener-alist Agents. Preprint , arXiv:2407.16741. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang (Eric) Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. Technical Report MSR-TR-2023-33, Microsoft. Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Agentless: Demystify-ing llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489 .John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Preprint ,arXiv:2405.15793. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. Preprint , arXiv:2210.03629. Semih Yavuz, Izzeddin Gur, Yu Su, and Xifeng Yan. 2018. What it takes to achieve 100% condition accu-racy on WikiSQL. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1702–1711, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingn-ing Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic pars-ing and text-to-SQL task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3911–3921, Brussels, Bel-gium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hanchong Zhang, Ruisheng Cao, Lu Chen, Hongshen Xu, and Kai Yu. 2023. Act-sql: In-context learning for text-to-sql with automatically-generated chain-of-thought. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 3501–3532. Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. 2022a. Planning with large language models for code gener-ation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yiming Zhang, Shi Feng, and Chenhao Tan. 2022b. Ac-tive example selection for in-context learning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9134– 9148, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Soft-ware Testing and Analysis , pages 1592–1604. 

A Experimental Details 

Throughout our experiments, we retrieve the top-3 most relevant database tables ( k = 3 ) to pop-ulate the context and set the maximum number of self-refinement attempts to 5. To ensure a fair comparison, these hyperparameter settings are kept consistent for both the baseline and our proposed method. Unless otherwise specified, all experiments uti-lize GPT-4o as the backbone LLM (OpenAI, 2024a). The temperature for all LLMs was set to 0.7. For experiments involving local model in-ference (e.g., open-source baselines), we utilized a server equipped with two NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs. The multi-agent framework is built upon the LangGraph library (LangChain AI, 2024). Vec-tor embeddings are generated using the text-embedding3small model from OpenAI (OpenAI, 2024b), and all vectorization tasks are subsequently handled by the Faiss library (Johnson et al., 2019). Our data modeling framework is built entirely on Neo4j (Neo4j, Inc., 2024), and we employ the Cypher query language for all graph traversal. 

Artifact Licenses and Terms. We utilize two public benchmarks for evaluation. The Spider 2.0 benchmark (Lei et al., 2025) is distributed under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license. The BIRD bench-mark (Li et al., 2023c) is distributed under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license. We confirm that our use of both datasets is consistent with their intended purpose for research. The code for SQLAgent, along with the constructed knowledge base, is released under the MIT License and is available in the supplemen-tary material. 

Evaluation Protocol. Due to the significant com-putational cost of running the full benchmark, all reported results reflect a single evaluation run. The deterministic nature of SQL execution over a fixed dataset ensures minimal variance across runs. 39322 B Implementation Details of Deployment Stage 

B.1 Schema and Query Vectorization 

As mentioned in Section 3.3, we employ semantic retrieval to bridge the gap between natural language and database schemas. 

Schema Embedding. To enable efficient re-trieval, each column c in the database is serial-ized into a descriptive string following the tem-plate: "[Name]: name; [Type]: type; [Desc]: comment" .

Knowledge Base Embedding. For the Knowl-edge Base constructed in the Exploration Stage, we vectorize the SQL component ( Q) of each triplet (S, Q, U ). We utilize a code-specific em-bedding model (e.g., textembedding3small or 

unixcoder ) to capture the structural and seman-tic features of the SQL queries. This allows the GenAgent to retrieve examples based on structural similarity rather than just keyword overlap. 

B.2 Agent Prompt Design 

The performance of SQLAgent relies on specific prompt instructions designed for the InfoAgent and GenAgent. 

InfoAgent Context Expansion. In the deploy-ment stage, the InfoAgent performs a second expansion step to infer implicit dependencies. The LLM is prompted to act as a database ex-pert. For example, if the initial retrieval contains 

users.user_name and orders.order_amount ,the prompt instructs the model to identify the necessary join keys (e.g., users.user_id and 

orders.customer_id ) to link these tables. A sim-plified version of the instruction is: 

“Given the user query and the retrieved schema fragments, analyze the relation-ships. If two tables are required but no join condition is present, identify and add the primary/foreign keys necessary to form a valid SQL join.” 

GenAgent Synthesis. The GenAgent receives a composite prompt containing: 1. Role Definition: “You are an expert SQL data analyst.” 2. Schema Context: The refined JSON structure from the InfoAgent. 3. Few-Shot Examples: The top-k retrieved triplets (S, Q, U ) from the Knowledge Base. 4. User Query: The target natural language question. This structured prompt ensures the model adheres to the specific syntax and schema constraints of the target database. 

C Definition of Database Structure 

As introduced in the main methodology, we repre-sent the relational database as a traversable graph structure to facilitate autonomous exploration. This model is composed of distinct node and relation-ship types that capture the hierarchical and rela-tional nature of the database schema. This appendix provides a formal definition of each component, their respective properties, and an overview of the graph’s statistical composition. 

C.1 Graph Schema Overview 

The graph model consists of five distinct node types and five relationship types that define their connec-tions. The primary node types are: • Database : The root node representing the entire database instance. • Schema : Represents a schema or dataset within the database. • Table : Represents a single table. • Field : Represents a column within a table. • Shared Field Group : Our proposed abstrac-tion for a reusable set of fields shared by mul-tiple tables. The relationships between these nodes define the structural integrity of the graph. Table 5 outlines the valid connections between node types. 

C.2 Node Property Definitions 

Each node in the graph contains a set of properties that store its metadata. The following tables detail the properties for each of the five node types. 

C.3 Graph Composition Statistics 

To provide a sense of scale, Table 11 summarizes the composition of the graph constructed from our experimental datasets. The statistics highlight the prevalence of fields, which constitute over 90% of all nodes. 39323 Table 5: Relationship types defining the connections between nodes in the graph schema. 

Start Node Type Relationship Type End Node Type 

Database HAS_SCHEMA Schema Schema HAS_TABLE Table Table USES_FIELD_GROUP SharedFieldGroup Table HAS_UNIQUE_FIELD Field SharedFieldGroup HAS_FIELD Field   

> Table 6: Properties of the Database node.

Property Description Example 

<id> Internal unique identifier for the node. 15313 name The name of the database instance. OPEN_TARGETS_PLATFORM_2 type Node type specifier. database   

> Table 7: Properties of the Schema node.

Property Description Example 

<id> Internal unique identifier for the node. 5430 database Name of the parent database. NOAA_DATA description A description of the schema, if available. -

name The name of the schema. NOAA_SIGNIFICANT_EARTHQUAKES type Node type specifier. schema   

> Table 8: Properties of the Table node.

Property Description Example 

<id> Internal unique identifier for the node. 185 database Name of the parent database. COVID19_USA ddl_summary A summary of the table’s DDL statement. Table with 245 columns fullname The fully qualified name of the table. CENSUS_BUREAU_ACS_2... name The name of the table. SCHOOLDISTRICTSECONDARY... schema Name of the parent schema. CENSUS_BUREAU_ACS type Node type specifier. table   

> Table 9: Properties of the SharedFieldGroup node.

Property Description Example 

<id> Internal unique identifier for the node. 2079 database Name of the parent database. NEW_YORK_PLUS description Auto-generated description of the group. FieldGroup_3ebfe5f9... field_count Number of fields encapsulated in this group. 24 field_hash An MD5 hash of the sorted field names, used to identify unique groups. 

3ebfe5f9... name Auto-generated name for the group. FieldGroup_3ebfe5f9 schema Name of the parent schema. NEW_YORK_TAXI_TRIPS type Node type specifier. shared_field_group 39324 Table 10: Properties of the Field node. 

Property Description Example 

<id> Internal unique identifier for the node. 18 database Name of the parent database. NEW_YORK description A description of the field, if available. -

name The name of the column/field. contributing_factor_vehicle_4 node_type Specifies if the field is part of a group or unique to a table. 

unique_field sample_data Sample data from this column. -

schema Name of the parent schema. NEW_YORK table Name of the parent table (for unique fields). NYPD_MV_COLLISIONS type The data type of the field. TEXT                           

> Table 11: Statistical overview of the constructed graph representation.
> Component Count Percentage
> Node Types
> Database 151 0.2% Schema 267 0.3% Table 7,848 8.7% SharedFieldGroup 542 0.6% Field 81,298 90.2%
> Total Nodes 90,106 100.0%
> Relationship Types
> HAS_SCHEMA 534 -
> HAS_TABLE 15,696 -
> USES_FIELD_GROUP 11,478 -
> HAS_UNIQUE_FIELD 104,808 -
> HAS_FIELD 57,788 -
> Total Relationships 190,304 -

A key component of our model is the 

SharedFieldGroup , designed to reduce redun-dancy. Our analysis confirms its effectiveness: • Total Groups: There are 542 unique 

SharedFieldGroup nodes. • Average Fan-out: On average, each group is linked to 10.6 tables, indicating frequent reuse. • Maximum Fan-out: The most utilized group is shared by 334 distinct tables. This analysis demonstrates the high prevalence of redundant schema structures in large-scale databases and validates our abstraction’s utility in creating a more compact and efficient representa-tion for exploration. 

D Identifying Shared Field Groups 

The identification of Shared Field Group nodes is a critical preprocessing step designed to abstract and consolidate recurring schema structures within the database. This process ensures that tables with identical field compositions are linked to a sin-gle, canonical group node, thereby reducing re-dundancy in the graph representation. The method-ology is executed in two primary phases: (1) gen-erating a unique signature for each distinct set of fields, and (2) applying a greedy algorithm to select a final, non-overlapping set of shared groups. 

Phase 1: Field Group Signature Generation To consistently identify tables that share an identical set of fields, we first compute a content-based sig-nature for the field structure of each table. This signature is derived from the names and data types of all columns within a table. The process, detailed in Algorithm 1, involves creating a canonical string representation for the set of fields. Each field is formatted as a string concatenation of its name and type ( e.g. ,

“user_id:INTEGER" ). To ensure that the signature is independent of the original column order, these formatted strings are sorted alphabetically before being joined into a single, delimited string. Finally, the MD5 hash function is applied to this canonical string to produce a compact and unique 128-bit signature. Any two tables that yield the same sig-nature are considered to have structurally identical schemas. 

Phase 2: Greedy Selection of Non-Overlapping Groups After an initial pass over all tables, we obtain a collection of potential shared groups, each identified by its unique signature and associated with a list of tables that match it. A subsequent optimization phase is necessary to produce a final, non-overlapping set of SharedFieldGroup s. This is crucial because complex schemas may contain 39325 Algorithm 1 Field Group Signature Generation 

Input: A table’s field set Ftable =

{(n1, t 1), (n2, t 2), . . . , (nm, t m)}, where ni is a field name, ti is its data type, and m is the number of fields. 

Output: A unique signature string Sgroup . 

> 1:

function GENERATE SIGNATURE (Ftable ) 

> 2:

Initialize an empty list Lf ields  

> 3:

for each field (ni, t i) in Ftable do  

> 4:

si ← Concatenate (ni, “ : ” , t i) ▷

Format as “name:type”  

> 5:

Append si to Lf ields  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Sort Lf ields alphabetically  

> 8:

Scanonical ← Join (Lf ields , “|′′ ) ▷ Create a canonical, delimited string  

> 9:

Sgroup ← MD5 (Scanonical ) ▷ Compute the MD5 hash  

> 10:

return Sgroup  

> 11:

end function 

nested or overlapping field structures. We employ a greedy selection algorithm, de-tailed in Algorithm 2, to resolve this. The core principle is to prioritize the most significant and im-pactful shared structures. First, all potential groups are sorted in descending order based on two criteria: primarily by the number of tables they encompass, and secondarily by the number of fields they con-tain (as a tie-breaker). This heuristic prioritizes groups that represent the most widespread schema patterns. The algorithm then iterates through this sorted list. For each candidate group, it checks if any of its member tables have already been assigned to a pre-viously selected group. If there is no overlap, the group is added to the final set, and all of its mem-ber tables are marked as assigned. This process ensures that each table can belong to at most one 

SharedFieldGroup , resulting in an unambiguous and efficient final graph structure. 

E Detailed Action Space 

This section provides a detailed description of the discrete action space used by the LLM in the ex-ploration stage. At each step of the tree search, the LLM selects one of the following actions to incrementally construct a SQL query based on the current query state and schema context. • Select Unused Column: Adds a new, previ-ously unselected column to the query’s ‘SE-

Algorithm 2 Greedy Selection of Shared Field Groups 

Input: A collection of all potential groups 

Pall , where each group g ∈ P all has a signa-ture, a set of fields, and a set of matching tables 

Tg.

Output: A final, non-overlapping set of shared groups Pf inal . 

> 1:

function SELECT GROUPS (Pall ) 

> 2:

Pf iltered ← { g ∈ P all | | Tg| ≥ 2} ▷

Consider only groups with at least two tables  

> 3:

Sort Pf iltered in descending order by |Tg|,then by number of fields.  

> 4:

Initialize Pf inal ← ∅  

> 5:

Initialize set of assigned tables 

Tassigned ← ∅  

> 6:

for each group g in sorted Pf iltered do  

> 7:

Tcurrent ← the set of tables in group g. 

> 8:

if Tcurrent ∩ Tassigned = ∅ then ▷

Check for overlap with already assigned tables  

> 9:

Pf inal ← P f inal ∪ { g} ▷ Add group to the final set  

> 10:

Tassigned ← Tassigned ∪ Tcurrent ▷

Mark tables as assigned  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return Pf inal  

> 14:

end function 

LECT‘ statement. This action progressively expands the breadth of information retrieved by the query. • Add Predicate Constraint: Applies a filter condition to an existing column, typically by adding a ‘WHERE‘ clause. This action nar-rows the scope of the query, allowing it to focus on specific subsets of data that meet certain criteria. • Introduce Join: Connects the current set of tables to a new table based on foreign key re-lationships or ‘Shared Field Group‘ linkages. This action is fundamental for exploring rela-tionships across different tables and synthesiz-ing information from multiple sources. • Apply Aggregation Function: Applies a summary function ( e.g. , ‘COUNT‘, ‘SUM‘, ‘AVG‘, ‘MAX‘, ‘MIN‘) to a previously se-lected column. This action transforms the query’s purpose from simple record retrieval to data summarization, enabling the model to 39326 understand the scale and distribution of the data. • Add Group By Clause: Groups the result set by one or more selected non-aggregated columns. This action is typically used in con-junction with aggregation functions to per-form categorical analysis, such as calculating metrics for different segments of the data ( e.g. ,“total sales per region”). • Add Ordering Clause: Sorts the final re-sult set based on a specified column, either in ascending (‘ASC‘) or descending (‘DESC‘) order via an ‘ORDER BY‘ clause. This en-ables the discovery of extremes, such as top-performing items or most recent events. • Add Having Clause: Applies a filter condi-tion to the results of a ‘GROUP BY‘ aggrega-tion. Unlike a ‘WHERE‘ clause which filters rows before aggregation, ‘HAVING‘ filters en-tire groups after aggregation, enabling more complex analytical questions like identifying categories that meet a certain threshold ( e.g. ,“customers with more than 5 orders”). 

F Algorithm for Dual-Agent SQL Synthesis 

This section provides a detailed algorithmic imple-mentation of the dual-agent framework for SQL synthesis, as described in the Deployment Stage of our methodology. The process is designed as an iterative loop where the InfoAgent and GenAgent 

collaborate to refine the context and generate the final SQL query. The InfoAgent is responsible for schema grounding and context management, while the GenAgent leverages the acquired knowledge base to synthesize the query. Algorithm 3 formal-izes this collaborative workflow. 

Algorithmic Details The algorithm details the iterative process of context refinement and query generation managed by the dual-agent framework. The process begins with an initialization phase (Lines 1-4), where the iteration counter, a success flag, and an empty structure for feedback informa-tion are prepared. The feedback_info variable is crucial for passing insights from a failed attempt to the next iteration. Each cycle within the main loop starts with the 

InfoAgent performing schema grounding and ex-pansion (Lines 6-9). It first uses an LLM to extract semantic keywords from the user’s utterance and performs a semantic search to retrieve an initial set of schema components. Since this set may be incomplete, a second LLM-driven step expands it by reasoning about logical necessities, such as join keys. Following this, a crucial context pruning 

step occurs (Line 9), where the InfoAgent uses feedback from any previous failed iteration to re-move unused schema components, thus narrowing the search space. The refined context is then passed to the GenA-gent , which conducts knowledge retrieval (Lines 11-12) by using the user’s intent to find the most relevant triplets from the knowledge base K. With these triplets as in-context examples, the GenAgent proceeds to SQL synthesis (Line 13), generating a candidate query. This query then undergoes ex-ecution and validation (Lines 15-24). This step has three possible outcomes. An Execution Fail-ure (e.g. , a syntax error) or a Semantic Mismatch 

(where the query output does not match the user’s intent) results in failure feedback being stored in 

feedback_info for the next loop. A Success oc-curs if the query executes correctly and passes the fidelity check, which sets the success flag and ter-minates the loop. The entire process continues until a valid query is found or the maximum number of iterations is reached, as defined by the termination 

condition (Lines 27-31), after which the final query or a failure signal is returned. 

G Extended Comparison with Inference-time Frameworks 

To further clarify the positioning of SQLA GENT 

relative to recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) Text-to-SQL frameworks, we provide a detailed conceptual comparison in this section. 

G.1 Proactive Knowledge Construction vs. Inference-time Prompting 

Frameworks such as Din-SQL , C3 , and Chess 

primarily focus on optimizing the inference-time 

reasoning process. They assume that given a suf-ficiently sophisticated prompt or decomposition strategy, a frozen LLM can correctly map natural language to an unseen database schema. In contrast, SQLA GENT operates on the premise that for complex enterprise-level databases, the pri-mary bottleneck is the agent’s lack of familiarity with unique schema semantics and intricate join paths. Our framework decouples knowledge acqui-39327 Algorithm 3 Dual-Agent SQL Synthesis Workflow 

Input: User Utterance Uin , Database Schema Graph G, Knowledge Base K, Database D, Max Iterations Nmax 

Output: Final SQL Query Qf inal or failure  

> 1:

function DUAL AGENT SYNTHESIS (Uin , G, K, D, N max ) 

> 2:

i ← 0 

> 3:

is _success ← false  

> 4:

f eedback _inf o ← ∅ ▷ Stores context from failed attempts for pruning  

> 5:

while i < N max and not is _success do 

▷ InfoAgent : Schema Grounding & Expansion  

> 6:

keywords ← LLM.ExtractKeywords (Uin ) 

> 7:

Cinitial ← SemanticSearch (G, keywords ) ▷ Retrieve initial top-k schema components  

> 8:

Cexpanded ← LLM.ExpandContext (Uin , C initial ) ▷ Reason and add necessary related components  

> 9:

Cctx ← Cexpanded \ PruneUnused (f eedback _inf o ) ▷ Refine context based on last failure 

▷ GenAgent : Knowledge Retrieval & SQL Synthesis  

> 10:

Qembed ← EmbedQueryIntent (Uin , C ctx ) 

> 11:

Kretrieved ← SimilaritySearch (K, Q embed ) ▷ Retrieve top-k triplets  

> 12:

Qcand ← LLM.GenerateSQL (Uin , C ctx , Kretrieved ) ▷ Generate candidate query 

▷ Execution and Validation Feedback Loop  

> 13:

result, error ← ExecuteSQL (D, Q cand ) 

> 14:

if error ̸ = ∅ or result is empty then  

> 15:

f eedback _inf o ← (Qcand , C ctx , “Execution Failed” ) ▷ Package feedback for context pruning  

> 16:

else  

> 17:

is _aligned ← LLM.CheckFidelity (Uin , result ) ▷ Semantic fidelity check  

> 18:

if is _aligned then  

> 19:

Qf inal ← Qcand  

> 20:

is _success ← true  

> 21:

else  

> 22:

f eedback _inf o ← (Qcand , C ctx , “Semantic Mismatch” ) 

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

i ← i + 1  

> 26:

end while  

> 27:

if is _success then  

> 28:

return Qf inal  

> 29:

else  

> 30:

return failure  

> 31:

end if  

> 32:

end function 

sition from query generation: • Offline Exploration Stage : SQLA GENT au-tonomously interacts with the live database to construct an executable knowledge base of triplets (S, Q, U ). This stage acts as an “auto-mated data engineer” learning the database’s specific logic before any user query is re-ceived. • Deployment Stage : The agent retrieves these validated, database-specific examples as in-context prompts. This effectively addresses the “cold-start” problem where inference-only methods often struggle due to ambiguous col-umn names or undocumented relationships. 39328 G.2 Amortized Cost Analysis 

While the Exploration Stage introduces an initial-ization overhead, this cost is amortized over the lifespan of the database application. In enterprise settings, database schemas are relatively stable, whereas user queries are frequent and repetitive. By investing in proactive exploration once, SQLA- 

> GENT

provides a more robust and accurate interface for all subsequent interactions, making the explo-ration cost a favorable trade-off for persistent data platforms. In this section, we provide a qualitative analysis to demonstrate how the database-specific knowl-edge acquired in the Exploration Stage facilitates complex SQL synthesis, followed by a detailed breakdown of the current failure modes observed in our experiments. 

H Case Study & Error Analysis 

In this section, we provide a qualitative analysis to demonstrate how the database-specific knowledge acquired in the Exploration Stage facilitates com-plex SQL synthesis, followed by a detailed textual breakdown of the current failure modes observed in our experiments. 

H.1 Case Study: Resolving Nested Structures and Sharded Relations 

The primary advantage of SQLA GENT is its abil-ity to proactively discover intricate join paths and undocumented schema semantics that are often invisible to zero-shot models. We il-lustrate this with a representative query from the GA4_OBFUSCATED_SAMPLE_ECOMMERCE dataset, which is characterized by time-sharded tables and nested VARIANT fields. 

User Question : “I want to know the preferences of customers who purchased the ’Google Navy Speckled Tee’ in December 2020. What other prod-uct was purchased with the highest total quantity alongside this item?” 

The Challenge : The database stores daily events in separate sharded tables (e.g., EVENTS_202012* ). SQLA GENT utilizes Shared Field Groups to abstract these into a single traversable template, significantly reducing search complexity. Fur-thermore, product information is encapsulated within a VARIANT column named ITEMS . Access-ing the item_name requires an UNNEST operation, a requirement that is not explicitly stated in the schema’s DDL but is essential for execution. 

Retrieved Exploration Triplet : During the Ex-ploration Stage, the agent validated the following triplet: • Schema Sub-structure (S): {events_* ,

items (VARIANT) , UNNEST(items) AS i }• SQL Fragment (Q): SELECT user_pseudo_id, i.item_name FROM ga4.events_*, UNNEST(items) AS iWHERE i.item_name IS NOT NULL 

• Description ( U ): “How to extract individual product names from the nested items array in GA4 tables.” 

Success vs. Failure : Without this triplet, the baseline model attempted to access 

items.item_name directly, resulting in asyntax error. By leveraging the triplet, the 

GenAgent correctly implemented the UNNEST 

pattern within a Common Table Expression (CTE), leading to a successful execution. 

H.2 Detailed Error Analysis 

Manual analysis of 100 failed samples in the Hard category (74.22% unresolved) reveals that remain-ing bottlenecks primarily stem from the inherent complexity of enterprise-scale Text-to-SQL rather than schema unfamiliarity. These challenges are twofold: (i) Reasoning Constraints , where ex-treme logical nesting ( e.g. , ≥ 4 subqueries) or excessive statement length ( > 100 lines) occa-sionally exceed the backbone LLM’s multi-step reasoning capacity and context window; and (ii) 

Fine-grained Semantic Grounding , involving pre-cise value-to-cell alignment ( e.g. , date formatting) and disambiguation between functionally distinct but semantically similar fields in dense schemas exceeding 800 columns. These findings suggest that while the Exploration Stage effectively bridges the “schema familiarity” gap, the next frontier for autonomous data agents lies in advancing multi-step logical synthesis and precise value alignment within massive-scale enterprise environments. 

I Detailed Component-Degradation Ablation 

To precisely quantify the contribution of each ar-chitectural component and the dynamics of the it-erative refinement loop, we conduct a component-degradation ablation study tracking Execution Ac-curacy (EX, %) across five iterative rounds. Ta-ble 12 presents seven configurations obtained by 39329 systematically removing or replacing individual modules of the full SQLAgent framework. The results reveal four key insights: 

Necessity of Exploration Knowledge. Remov-ing the knowledge base (“Remove GenAgent Knowledge”) caps peak accuracy at 14.26%, con-firming that raw DDL alone is insufficient for com-plex multi-step queries. 

Power of the Refinement Loop. The full method surges from 5.48% (Round 1) to a stable 25.78% (Round 4–5), demonstrating that iterative con-text refinement is essential for resolving complex queries that cannot be answered in a single pass. 

InfoAgent Component Dynamics. Context Ex-pansion is critical for discovering implicit join paths: removing it reduces peak accuracy by 2.93 points. More notably, removing Context Pruning 

causes accuracy to actively degrade in later rounds (from 21.02% at R3 to 16.45% at R5), because accumulating unused schema items overwhelms the context window and introduces noise, causing agents to revise initially correct queries into incor-rect ones. 

GenAgent Component Dynamics. Structural vector retrieval outperforms keyword matching (+5.49% at peak), confirming that semantic similar-ity over SQL structure is a more effective retrieval signal than lexical overlap. The Semantic Fidelity Check acts as a guardrail against false positives, specifically queries that execute successfully but answer a different question than the user intended, contributing 4.76% to peak accuracy. 

J Shared Field Group: Scalability Analysis 

J.1 Exploration Termination Criteria 

The exploration stage terminates based on two cri-teria, regardless of database size: (1) Field cov-erage : exploration halts when 90% of all fields have been incorporated into at least one validated triplet; (2) Iteration budget : a hard cap of 300 total attempts prevents unbounded exploration on extremely large schemas. These criteria balance thoroughness against computational cost and can be tuned based on deployment requirements. 

J.2 Effect of Removing Shared Field Group 

The Shared Field Group abstraction is fundamental to making exploration tractable on large-scale enter-prise databases. To quantify its impact, we conduct ablation experiments at two levels of granularity. 

Single-database analysis (BLS_QCEW). Ta-ble 13 reports results on the BLS_QCEW database, a highly sharded schema representative of enter-prise time-series data stores. Without the abstraction, 22,892 redundant field nodes must be individually traversed; the agent exhausts its context window on repetitive, semanti-cally identical paths rather than exploring diverse query structures. The Shared Field Group com-presses these into a single canonical node, achiev-ing a 98.6% reduction in graph size and a 45.0-point improvement in exploration success rate. 

Full benchmark analysis. Table 14 reports statistics across all 151 databases in our bench-mark. At scale, the abstraction reduces total graph nodes from 1,030,327 to 90,106 (an 11 .4× com-pression) and more than doubles the average ex-ploration success rate. Beyond efficiency, this re-dundancy reduction directly improves diversity :without shared groups, the agent wastes its ex-ploration budget generating semantically identical queries for every sharded table (e.g., sales_day1 ,

sales_day2 ), crowding out coverage of struc-turally distinct schema regions. 

K Knowledge Retrieval Strategy Analysis 

An alternative to retrieving structured (S, Q, U )

triplets from the knowledge base is to directly vec-torize and retrieve the raw exploration trajectories, including all intermediate trial-and-error steps, as context for the InfoAgent. Table 15 compares these two retrieval strategies. Direct vectorization of raw trajectories under-performs by 6.96 points . Raw exploration logs contain significant noise: failed attempts, partial queries, and repetitive backtracking steps that do not represent valid schema knowledge. Including this noise degrades retrieval precision and intro-duces misleading in-context examples. By con-trast, our distillation process, which retains only triplets satisfying syntactic validity, execution suc-cess, and non-empty result criteria, produces a com-pact, high-signal knowledge base that enables pre-cise few-shot retrieval during deployment. 39330 Table 12: In-depth Component-Degradation Ablation across Iteration Rounds. EX (%) is reported at each round of the dual-agent refinement loop. Configurations are obtained by removing or replacing individual modules from the full method. 

Configuration Change Description R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 Full Method (SQLAgent) Complete dual-agent framework 5.48 18.28 21.94 25.78 25.78 

Replace InfoAgent Replace with simple semantic retrieval 5.48 11.88 16.45 18.65 19.20 w/o Context Expansion Skip LLM-based dependency inference (e.g., foreign keys) 5.48 15.54 20.11 22.49 22.85 w/o Context Pruning Do not remove unused schema items dur-ing refinement 5.48 17.37 21.02 19.20 16.45 Remove GenAgent Knowledge Remove exploration knowledge; input raw DDL only 5.85 13.71 14.26 14.08 14.26 Replace Semantic Retrieval Use keyword matching instead of vector embeddings 5.12 12.80 17.37 19.74 20.29 w/o Semantic Fidelity Check Accept any successfully executed SQL without intent check 5.48 14.63 19.20 21.02 21.02 

Table 13: Shared Field Group Impact on BLS_QCEW Database. The abstraction reduces graph nodes by 98.6% and more than doubles the exploration success rate.            

> Configuration Graph Nodes Search Space Success Rate
> Without Shared Group 23,010 (118T+22,892F) Intractable 33.5% With Shared Group (Ours) 313 (118T+1G+194F) Converged 78.5%

Table 14: Shared Field Group Impact Across Full Benchmark. Removing the abstraction inflates the total graph by 11 .4× and more than halves the exploration success rate. 

Configuration Total Nodes Avg. Success Rate 

Without Shared Group 1,030,327 36.17% With Shared Group (Ours) 90,106 74.69% 

Table 15: Retrieval Strategy Comparison. Structured triplet retrieval substantially outperforms direct vector-ization of raw exploration trajectories.         

> Strategy Characteristics EX (%)
> Direct Vectorization Raw exploration trajectories (noisy, redundant) 18.82 Ours ( (S, Q, U )Triplets) Structured, validated, purified ex-perience
> 25.78

L LLM Usage 

This statement is to disclose the use of large lan-guage models (LLMs) in preparing this manuscript, in accordance with ACL policy. The use of LLMs was strictly limited to improving the language and readability of the text, including grammar correc-tion and stylistic polishing. LLMs did not con-tribute to any core scientific aspects of this work, such as research ideation, experimental design, or data analysis. All intellectual contributions are the original work of the authors, who assume full re-sponsibility for the final content. 39331