Title: OmicsNavigator: An auditable scientific partner for scalable hypothesis validation in spatial omics

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 52

Markdown Content:
# OmicsNavigator : An auditable scientific partner for scalable hypothesis validation in spatial omics 

## Yiyao Li 1, Nirvi Vakharia 2, Weixin Liang 3, Aaron T. Mayer 4,Ruibang Luo 1, Alexandro E. Trevino 4, Zhenqin Wu 1* 

1* The University of Hong Kong. 

2 Purdue University. 

3 Stanford University. 

4 Enable Medicine. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): zqwu@cs.hku.hk; Contributing authors: liyiyao@connect.hku.hk; nvakhari@purdue.edu; wxliang@cs.stanford.edu; aaron@enablemedicine.com; rbluo@cs.hku.hk; alex@enablemedicine.com; 

Abstract 

Translating high-dimensional, spatially resolved molecular datasets into testable biological findings remains a major research bottleneck. Here, we present Omic-sNavigator , an autonomous large language model-powered system for end-to-end data exploration and hypothesis validation on spatial omics data. OmicsNaviga-tor reasons directly over the multi-modal inputs of spatial omics data, including visual and molecular signatures, to perform knowledge-guided annotation of spatial structures. We show that by transforming high-dimensional data into textual interpretations, OmicsNavigator enables zero-shot semantic retrieval of tissue biomarkers and the reconstruction of patient-level disease profiles from raw omics observations. Furthermore, OmicsNavigator features an objective hypoth-esis validation engine governed by pre-registered, human-audited blueprints. By validating the system across datasets spanning diverse pathological conditions including diabetic kidney disease, kidney transplant rejection, and COVID-19 pulmonary pathology, we demonstrate that OmicsNavigator generates evidence-based, human-readable insights from spatial omics data, with potential to accelerate spatial biology discoveries. 

1

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint 1 Introduction 

Spatial omics technologies characterize the detailed molecular composition of tis-sues within their native architecture, advancing our understanding of complex tissue biology [1]. Platforms such as 10x Visium [2], MERFISH [3], Xenium [4], CODEX/Phe-noCycler [5], and MIBI-TOF [6] now routinely generate terabytes of data comprising spatially resolved, high-dimensional molecular measurements for diverse tissue land-scapes. However, this technological leap has precipitated an analytical bottleneck: while we possess maps of these territories, we lack the autonomous navigators to traverse them. Significant progress has been made in the computational modeling of spatial omics data. Current state-of-the-art approaches extract cellular features—such as gene/pro-tein expression and morphology—represented as matrices [7–10] or graphs [9, 11–13]. These representations feed into advanced artificial intelligence models to generate latent embeddings for diverse downstream analyses. Concretely, specialized tools have now robustly addressed key analytical tasks such as cell segmentation [14, 15], cell type clustering [16–18], and neighborhood annotation [19, 20], enabling the cura-tion of detailed cellular maps of tissue architectures. Nevertheless, an open challenge remains: how to seamlessly bridge these computational abstractions with broader clin-ical contexts and pre-existing biological knowledge. Consequently, the field faces an “interpretation gap,” where the richness of spatial data is often reduced to catalogs of cells and neighborhoods. While powerful, these approaches risk devaluing intuitive, human-readable insights needed to inform biological understanding and discoveries. The integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into bioinformatics has offered promising solutions for automated pipeline orchestration, code generation, and tool execution [21–27]. These systems demonstrated strong capabilities in executing exist-ing cell-centric pipelines—composing and executing code, and interfacing with existing bioinformatics tools. An area of keen interest that remains underexplored is enabling agentic systems to operate and reason directly over the underlying multi-modal data— such as interpreting local molecular signatures alongside tissue morphology to identify pathological structures associated with patient phenotypes. Expanding agentic capa-bilities into this space is essential to fully leverage the rich spatial contexts—visuals of tissue morphology, subcellular organization, and surrounding environment of cells— that are crucial for biological interpretation. To unlock the full potential of spatial omics and bridge the interpretation gap, we envision a next-generation spatial biol-ogy computational tool that moves beyond the cell-centric task space and toward the autonomous extraction and synthesis of evidence, grounded in the spatially resolved data, the biological prior knowledge, and the study-specific research questions. In parallel, the rapidly increasing capabilities of AI agents in scientific research raise concerns about the reliability of their output. State-of-the-art agentic scientific tools have enabled the automated, parallel generation of thousands of ideas, hypotheses, and candidate insights [28–31]. While this throughput is a testament to the power of LLM-driven discovery, it simultaneously overwhelms researchers with findings that may stem from spurious correlations or statistical artifacts [31, 32]. Existing pipelines, whether led by human researchers or AI agents, remain susceptible to confirmation bias and subjective parameter tuning—issues that are particularly relevant in spatial 2

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

biology, where studies typically involve small biological cohorts with thousands of profiled cells per sample, and where subjective selection of neighborhoods might alter analysis conclusions. We argue that to serve as a genuine research partner in this high-throughput era, a next-generation computational tool must follow a framework with autonomous self-constraints, complemented by human oversight. To realize this vision of a rigorous, spatially aware scientific partner for spatial biol-ogy, we introduce OmicsNavigator (Figure 1), an autonomous agentic system designed for objective, end-to-end data exploration and hypothesis validation. OmicsNavigator 

demonstrates the following key capabilities: (1) high-throughput, multi-modal inter-pretation of spatial structures by directly reasoning over visual morphology, molecular signatures, and curated biological prior knowledge; (2) zero-shot retrieval and discov-ery of spatial biomarkers using natural language queries; (3) study-scale summary and reasoning to derive disease-relevant insights; and most crucially, (4) autonomous, self-constrained hypothesis validation, enforced by human-in-the-loop (HITL) audits and pre-registered evaluations. To achieve these capabilities in practice, we developed and integrated novel mechanisms, including a specialized Plan Module that synthesizes lit-erature and user queries into Background Knowledge Checklists and Verification Blueprint , a dual-channel profiling mechanism for annotations of spatial structures, a “Cluster-Anchor-Expand” mechanism for efficient retrieval, and a directed acyclic graph (DAG)-guided hypothesis validation pipeline. Across diverse datasets spanning diabetic kidney disease (DKD) [33], kidney trans-plant rejection [34, 35], and COVID-19 pulmonary pathology [36], OmicsNavigator 

consistently demonstrates reliable performance in data interpretation, exploration, and retrieval. It delivers evidence-backed verifications and refutations for user-specified hypotheses, and demonstrates capabilities to discover new biological narratives beyond initial queries. By enabling researchers to interact directly with high-dimensional tissue landscapes through natural language, OmicsNavigator transforms technically demanding computational workflows into an intuitive, human-readable process. 

# 2 Results 

## 2.1 Autonomous Curation of Biological Priors 

Interpretations of spatial omics data, an essential step towards automated scientific discovery, rely heavily on domain-specific biological prior knowledge. Acquiring such priors, however, often demands manual curation by domain experts, creating a bot-tleneck in translating computational analysis to biological understanding. As LLMs are increasingly integrated into modern computational biology workflows for omics analysis[37–40], this need for biological priors becomes even more critical, as LLMs without strict evidence-based guardrails are prone to hallucinations and misalignment. To overcome this expert-dependency bottleneck and ground LLM reasoning in pre-existing biological knowledge, OmicsNavigator introduces a dedicated Plan Module (Figure 1A) to autonomously curate these domain-specific biological priors before any close examination begins. This autonomous knowledge curation is executed via a sequential workflow of spe-cialized sub-agents to extract and synthesize evidence from diverse sources. First, a 3

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

DataAnalyst sub-agent performs a global, unsupervised profiling of the input spatial omics data. It establishes baseline metrics such as cell composition and spatially vari-able expression. A LiteratureReviewer is then deployed to extract existing evidence from the literature. It translates the data baselines and user inputs into structured semantic queries, and then executes targeted queries across publication repositories (e.g., PubMed) and biological databases (e.g., NCBI [41], QuickGO [42]), focusing on mining relevant pathological mechanisms and known biomarkers. Based on these priors—background knowledge, relevant literature, and dataset baselines—a Planner agent synthesizes them into structured Background Knowledge Checklists (Appendix B.2). These checklists encode the reasoning logic of a human expert, providing domain-specific criteria for subsequent analysis. For instance, in the context of DKD, checklists include morphological guidelines (e.g., identifying a glomerulus via a distinct Perlecan/Collagen ring), molecular enrichment rules (e.g., differentiating tubular structures from glomeruli by epithelial protein mark-ers), disease-associated phenotypes (e.g., fibrosis and inflammation), and quantitative indicators for disease severity. By establishing these priors, the checklists serve as a cognitive foundation that constrains the downstream interpretations and reasoning, thereby reducing hallucinations. Beyond establishing biological priors, the Plan Module simultaneously lays the groundwork for hypothesis validation. In addition to the checklists, the central Planner 

agent parses the user-supplied queries and proposes a standardized Verification Blueprint (Appendix B.3). The blueprint defines exact hypothesis-testing pipelines before any analysis is run—locking in target variables, inclusion criteria, and testing paths in the format of a DAG (Supplementary Figure 1). Crucially, before executing subsequent analysis, OmicsNavigator requires a user review of the checklists and the blueprint. In this step, researchers can revise and augment these documents; once confirmed, they are locked throughout the analy-sis to establish a fixed execution space and to serve as a guardrail against agentic confirmation bias. 

## 2.2 Intelligent Multi-modal Interpretation of Spatial Structures 

Data exploration, hypothesis validation, and insight discovery in spatial omics stud-ies all build on accurate interpretations of spatial structures across scales—cells, neighborhoods, and beyond. To achieve that, OmicsNavigator employs a dedicated interpretation module that leverages the established domain-specific biological priors to interpret raw observations. To analyze structures of diverse scales, OmicsNavigator interacts with the complex, high-dimensional spatial omics data using units termed Regions of Interest (ROIs). Operationally, an ROI is defined by a local bounding box of variable size centered on a specific spatial coordinate or cell, capturing both microscopic morphology and molecu-lar profiles within that window. For any given ROI, the interpretation module employs a dual-channel profiling mechanism to characterize it: two specialized sub-agents— a VisualProfiler for visual morphology images and an OmicsProfiler for molecular profiles—extract features as natural language descriptions. Both sub-agents are guided 4

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

by the pre-registered Background Knowledge Checklists . The two streams of infor-mation are subsequently fused by the OmicsInterpreter (Figure 2A), which integrates the evidence with the biological priors to produce a spatially aware interpretation of the structures contained in the queried ROI. The prior-guided design allows OmicsNavigator to produce interpretations with clear biological relevance, including explicit linkage to the disease pathology. As demonstrated in the annotations of a late-stage DKD kidney tissue section (Figure 2B), 

OmicsInterpreter successfully performed interpretations for three arbitrarily sampled ROIs across the heterogeneous tissue landscape. It correctly identified canonical struc-tures (e.g., glomeruli) and disease-induced inflammation domains. Furthermore, it assigned high relevance scores to the glomeruli and inflammation ROIs, consistent with their pathological significance in DKD. Integration of multi-modal information is another core feature of the interpretation module. An illustrative example is shown in Figure 2C. Visual-only interpretation of this ROI leaned towards interstitium due to morphological clues and irregular luminal shapes. Conversely, omics-only interpretation misclassified the ROI as distal tubules due to protein marker profiles. Such failures were often observed in ambiguous regions, where the fused interpretation generated by OmicsInterpreter resolves the ambiguity and correctly annotates the queried ROI. To quantify interpretation performance, we evaluated zero-shot annotation accu-racy against ground truth human annotations across three datasets of diverse biological contexts—DKD-affected kidney, healthy lung, and SARS-CoV-2-infected lung (Figure 2D–F). Across all scenarios, OmicsNavigator ’s interpretations consis-tently achieved strong F1 scores in annotating canonical structures. Furthermore, the multi-modal configuration consistently outperformed both visual-only and omics-only baselines. The incorporation of biological priors proved critical for accurate interpre-tations (Supplementary Figure 2). Minor differences were observed between agents powered by different LLM engines, among which Gemini-2.5-Pro yielded the highest overall interpretation performance. Confusion matrices confirmed good precision in distinguishing canonical structures (e.g., proximal vs. distal tubules, airway walls vs. alveolar spaces). We adopt this Gemini-driven configuration as the standard setup for all subsequent experiments. We emphasize that the ROI-level interpretations performed by OmicsNavigator 

are different from the related task of spatial domain/niche discovery, which focuses on unsupervised clustering of observations. Here, interpretations are generated inde-pendently for each ROI and are grounded in biological prior knowledge. This enables more flexible and nuanced characterization of rare or disease-associated structures, and yields semantically meaningful annotations that directly support subsequent reasoning about patient-level disease states. 

## 2.3 Scalable Zero-shot Semantic Retrieval of Spatial Biomarkers 

Building on accurate interpretations of ROIs, we next introduce a SemanticRetriever 

agent that performs semantic retrieval over spatial omics studies. Concretely, given a user query or hypothesis, SemanticRetriever identifies and locates all ROIs containing 5

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

query-relevant structures or spatial biomarkers and characterizes their properties in relation to the query. A naive solution would apply the interpretation module exhaustively to every ROI in the study, followed by searching the user query against the resulting interpretation text corpus. This is infeasible in practice due to computational and budgetary con-straints, as spatial omics studies routinely contain millions of cells. To enable accurate retrieval at scale, SemanticRetriever leverages a “Cluster-Anchor-Expand” pruning strategy for efficient, zero-shot spatial biomarker discovery. The pipeline proceeds in three stages (Figure 3 A). First, ROIs are enumerated and grouped based on their multi-modal features and spatial coordinates, using a multi-level clustering strategy inspired by previous works [43, 44]. We then prune each resulting group using a distance-weighted stochastic sampling approach, result-ing in biologically representative “Anchor ROIs”. Typically for each tissue section, this approach yields around 50-100 anchor ROIs, which are then submitted to the inter-pretation module. Subsequently, the user query, parsed as natural language keywords, is compared against anchor ROI interpretations using text-based similarity metrics to retrieve top matches, termed “hits”. Lastly, SemanticRetriever employs an expansion step that leverages hits to identify all relevant ROIs across the study. More details of this pipeline can be found in Methods. We evaluated SemanticRetriever using two canonical structures as spatial biomark-ers: glomeruli and distal convoluted tubules. Here, the target structures are queried in plain natural language against three kidney spatial biology datasets spanning differ-ent institutions, pathologies, and biomarker panels. Qualitatively, the retrieved ROIs across datasets demonstrated consistent and close alignment with expert annotations (Figure 3). In the DKD dataset, SemanticRetriever achieved a precision of 0.97 at the top-60 ( k = 60) cutoff when retrieving glomeruli, with 89% of all glomeruli in the study identified at this cutoff (Figure 3 B). Queries for distal convoluted tubules yielded a precision of 0.93 at the same k = 60 cutoff (Figure 3 C). The mean Average Precision ( mAP @k) curves for both cases remained near 1.0 with tight 90% confidence intervals, indicating both high accuracy and stability of our approach. In addition to canonical structures, SemanticRetriever can also discover disease-associated spatial biomarkers using natural language queries. When queried for “Immune Aggregates”, a hallmark of various pathological conditions, SemanticRe-triever located ROIs that exhibit strong enrichment in major immune cell stains (e.g., CD45, CD68). Furthermore, the abundance of retrieved ROIs demonstrated strong positive correlations with clinically determined staging or inflammation scores assigned by pathologists (Figure 3 D). Together, these results establish that the system can locate pathologically meaningful spatial structures in the study based on natural lan-guage descriptions alone, enabling further quantitative analyses across regions and patients. 

## 2.4 Patient-Scale Disease State Characterization 

Patient-level pathological phenotypes typically emerge from the collective accumu-lation of micro-scale aberrations distributed across the tissue. Such micro-scale 6

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

pathological changes can be captured and located using OmicsNavigator ’s ROI inter-pretation and retrieval capabilities demonstrated above. To further enable patient-level clinical analysis, it is necessary to aggregate these local observations into coherent disease state summaries. To this end, OmicsNavigator implements an aggregation pipeline that reconstructs patient-level disease states from ROI-level observations and interpretations. The aggregation pipeline proceeds in three major steps. First, OmicsNavigator 

identifies and retrieves disease-relevant ROIs. This can be performed by targeting known pathological structures via SemanticRetriever , as demonstrated in Figure 3 D. Alternatively, thresholding on the disease relevance scores assigned by the interpreta-tion module (e.g., score ≥ 80) can surface all ROIs that are relevant for evaluating the patient’s disease state. Second, OmicsNavigator counts these disease-relevant ROIs to derive quantitative measures of how much the patient sample is characterized by disease-induced changes. Third, OmicsNavigator synthesizes the natural language interpretations of these disease-relevant ROIs to compose a patient-level summary that captures the core pathological changes at play. We applied this aggregation pipeline to the DKD cohort to reconstruct clinical pro-gression (Figure 4A). Counts of highly disease-relevant ROIs remained near zero for early-stage samples but increased substantially in late-stage samples, yielding a statis-tically significant, stepwise increase across stages (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD, 

p < 0.001). Concurrently, the synthesized semantic summaries reflected shifts from localized structural changes with minimal inflammation to severe immune infiltration combined with interstitial fibrosis and vascular rarefaction. In another kidney cohort of transplant rejection (Figure 4B), counts of disease-relevant ROIs differed significantly between acute rejection samples and normal controls (Student’s t-test, p < 0.001). Crucially, the normal baseline yielded zero hits, highlighting the system’s high speci-ficity. The corresponding semantic summaries described the immune quiescence and structural integrity in normal samples, contrasted with the severe host-versus-graft damage in acute rejection samples. We next applied OmicsNavigator to two lung disease conditions (Figure 4C, D). In the COVID-19 cohort, the system captured a significant severity gradient from the healthy baseline to early infection to late-stage exacerbation (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD, p < 0.001). Semantic summaries identified a patho-logical progression from localized early viral injury to widespread pathogenesis: pan-tissue immune activation and compartmentalized alveolar fibrosis. In the com-parison between acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and healthy samples, 

OmicsNavigator differentiated the two phenotypes (Student’s t-test, p < 0.001). The semantic summary identified aberrant proliferative repair, vascular injury, and macrophage-driven organization as core drivers of the ARDS organizing phase. These reconstructed disease trajectories are deterministic by design. The criteria for targeting ROIs—biological priors of the disease and relevance scoring rubrics—are pre-registered in the Background Knowledge Checklists before any analysis is run. Consequently, this approach mitigates potential confirmation bias during patient-level reasoning. 7

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## 2.5 Pre-registered Autonomous Hypothesis Validation 

Finally, to translate high-dimensional spatial omics data into scientific deliverables, 

OmicsNavigator leverages a HypothesisValidator agent that integrates outputs from all components to perform rigorous, end-to-end hypothesis validation (Figure 5). 

HypothesisValidator inherits outputs from preceding phases: (1) the Verification Blueprint from the Planner agent (Section 2.1) serves as an execution guide; (2) zero-shot semantic retrieval (Section 2.3) of hypothesis-related ROIs (e.g., glomeruli for kidney function studies, alveoli for pulmonary state analysis) by SemanticRetriever 

provides pools of relevant ROIs for targeted analysis; (3) interpretations (Section 2.2) by OmicsInterpreter offer detailed characterization of these ROIs; and (4) patient-level aggregation (Section 2.4) synthesizes the ROI-level data into patient-level observations across different pathological conditions for statistical assessment. Here, we demonstrate HypothesisValidator ’s capability using two case studies across different organ systems and datasets. In both cases, HypothesisValidator fol-lows the pre-registered DAG defined in the Verification Blueprint to execute the computational pipeline. The frameworks proposed autonomously by the Plan-ner agent utilize Linear Mixed Models (LMMs) to account for heterogeneity of ROIs nested within individual patients and apply multiple-testing corrections (e.g., Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR)) to control false positives. 

Case Study I: Diabetic Glomerulopathy We first evaluated whether three aspects of diabetic glomerulopathy—structural decline, cellular stress, and immune infiltration—progress monotonically with DKD stage (Figure 5A). The Verification Blueprint formulated an analytical protocol targeting glomeruli, and utilized the LMM engine to account for patient-level variances. Guided by the DAG, the Hypothesis-Validator quantified the trajectories of key spatial biomarkers and protein expression relevant to glomerulopathy across stages. 

HypothesisValidator produced detailed, data-driven findings that describe the changes in glomeruli during DKD progression: it found that structural decline, measured by the podocyte integrity marker Nestin, is highly patient-dependent. Patient-specific baselines accounted for 36.4% of the spatial variance (Nestin intra-class correlation (ICC)). Consequently, the overall trend of structural decline did not reach statistical significance under LMM adjustment (FDR p = 0 .063) and was there-fore refuted. This result suggests that the collapse of the filtration barrier is heavily influenced by patient-specific baseline factors rather than being uniformly tied to clin-ical stage. A larger, better-powered study is needed to disentangle these patient-level effects from stage-dependent progression. In contrast, the LMM detected a significant, monotonic increase in CD68+ macrophage recruitment across the disease continuum (FDR p = 0 .017) despite mod-erate individual differences (ICC = 27.1%). This supports immune infiltration as a conserved mechanism that increases monotonically with DKD progression, regardless of a patient’s glomerular structural baseline. Finally, proteotoxic stress, measured by glomerular Clusterin levels, exhibited low patient-specific variance (ICC = 7.2%) and a non-monotonic trend. While the hypothesis of a monotonic trend was later refuted (FDR p = 0 .063), HypothesisValidator noted a potential non-linear dynamic that peaks at mid-stage as a candidate for further investigation. 8

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

OmicsNavigator ’s re-analysis converges with Kondo et al. [33] on the major find-ings: a monotonic increase in CD68+ macrophage infiltration across DKD progression, and pronounced heterogeneity in glomerular structural decline. The LMM engine employed by HypothesisValidator quantifies this heterogeneity explicitly—Nestin’s high patient-level ICC (36.4%) provides support for the patchiness that the original study described visually. Additionally, we characterize a potential non-monotonic tra-jectory of cellular stress that peaks at mid-stage DKD, a dynamic not reported in the original analysis. 

Case Study II: Pathogenesis of Pulmonary SARS-CoV-2 Infection (COVID-19) 

We next applied OmicsNavigator to investigate pulmonary pathogenesis during COVID-19, testing whether the disease is characterized by spatially compartmen-talized responses including fibrosis and inflammation (Figure 5B). Guided by the 

Verification Blueprint , HypothesisValidator executed automated retrieval to extract alveolar space and vascular ROIs for targeted analysis. It then applied LMM analy-sis to evaluate extracellular matrix and immune population trajectories within each compartment. The analysis revealed distinct dynamics within the two spatial compartments. Macrophage enrichment was observed as a pan-compartmental event occurring con-sistently across both alveolar and vascular spaces, while fibrotic scarring was strictly compartmentalized. Specifically, collagen deposition exhibited a highly significant, monotonic increase solely within the alveolar space (FDR p = 0 .004). Conversely, its relative proportion remained flat in vessels (FDR p = 0 .173). When evaluating alveo-lar neutrophils, HypothesisValidator detected high baseline variance across individuals (ICC = 60.8%). After adjusting for this intra-patient correlation, the LMM engine sup-pressed a region-level correlation (naive p < 0.001) and yielded a non-significant result (FDR p = 0 .321). This demonstrates OmicsNavigator ’s ability to mitigate the impact of pseudo-replication and isolate genuine, localized signals (e.g., alveolar fibrosis) while preventing the overestimation of statistical significance. These results parallel and refine the findings of Rendeiro et al. [36]. Consistent with the original report of pan-tissue macrophage infiltration and progressive alveo-lar fibrosis in late COVID-19, HypothesisValidator ’s compartment-decoupled analysis localized the collagen increase to the alveolar space—a finer-grained test not per-formed in the original study, where fibrosis was scored at the region level. Furthermore, 

HypothesisValidator used a patient-level mixed-effects framework to replace the orig-inal Mann–Whitney tests, which addressed the inter-individual variances better and avoided statistical overestimation due to pseudoreplications. 

# 3 Discussion 

The advent of highly multiplexed spatial omics has exposed an analytical bottle-neck: the challenge of traversing large volumes of spatially resolved molecular data and extracting data-grounded biological insights. While the recent integration of LLMs has accelerated bioinformatics workflows by automating code execution and tool utilization, current approaches operate primarily as computational technicians 9

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

that reproduce cell-centric analyses, and thus leave the interpretation gap unad-dressed. Moreover, the unconstrained generative nature of LLMs risks the generation of false positive discoveries such as spurious correlations and statistically unsup-ported hypotheses. To address these limitations, we developed OmicsNavigator , an autonomous agentic system designed to act as an objective scientific partner for spatial biology. 

OmicsNavigator utilizes a sequential framework composed of planning, interpreta-tion, and analysis modules that mirrors the analytical workflow of domain experts. The system builds on the core ability to interpret micro-scale ROIs using autonomously curated biological prior knowledge and spatially aware, multi-modal observations. This is demonstrated and validated across diverse datasets spanning different kidney and lung diseases. Based on this fine-grained understanding of data, OmicsNavigator fur-ther employs a scalable semantic retrieval mechanism and an aggregation pipeline to discover, locate, and summarize disease-relevant structures from patient data, recon-structing patient-level disease profiles grounded in ROI-level observations. Together, these capabilities enable study-scale autonomous hypothesis validation, where Omic-sNavigator extracts and synthesizes visual and molecular evidence from micro-scale ROIs into concrete biological findings that are both data-grounded and statistically tested. A defining design of OmicsNavigator is its structural commitment to objectivity. During development, we observed a concerning propensity for autonomous agents to engage in algorithmic p-hacking. When tasked with validating a user’s hypothesis with-out guardrails, agents sometimes exhibited suspicious behaviors such as shifting ROI inclusion boundaries or iteratively switching between parametric and non-parametric statistical tests to artificially achieve a significance threshold that satisfied the initial prompt. To prevent this, OmicsNavigator establishes mechanisms to enforce isolation of semantic reasoning/planning from statistical computations. By locking biologi-cal priors (i.e., Background Knowledge Checklists ) and validation pipelines (i.e., 

Verification Blueprint ) before any data evaluation, OmicsNavigator mitigates the operating agents’ ability to retrospectively alter targets or statistical testing choices. This pre-registration design helps to ensure an objective, reliable scientific partner for spatial biology research. Beyond preventing algorithmic bias, OmicsNavigator adopts an auditable HITL framework to mitigate the “black-box” risks and to ensure alignment with domain expertise. Before large-scale computations begin, researchers are mandated to approve the generated Background Knowledge Checklists and Verification Blueprint ,facilitated via a graphical interface (Supplementary Figure 3). This ensures a pre-execution consensus that mitigates both downstream hallucinations and user-induced confirmation bias. Complementing this, the DAG-based execution of hypothesis val-idation enables retrospective traceability for outcomes. OmicsNavigator ’s underlying data logs maintain a mapping between any patient- or study-scale outcome (e.g., a reported p-value for a trend) and the exact ROI observations that contributed to it. Researchers can therefore unpack any high-level conclusion into a continuous, grounded chain of evidence down to the raw, micro-scale interpretations of individual 10 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ROIs. This enforced transparency of OmicsNavigator ensures that every autonomous insight remains fully verifiable. Despite the demonstrated capabilities in automating spatially aware reasoning and hypothesis validation, OmicsNavigator operates within explicit technical bound-aries. First, as a prior-constrained engine, its efficacy heavily depends on the quality of background knowledge. In “knowledge-sparse” scenarios—such as rare diseases or studies of highly heterogeneous tumor microenvironments—traditional API-based lit-erature retrieval is inflexible and may miss critical mechanistic nuances. A potential improvement to overcome this bottleneck is to integrate “Deep Research” capabilities that execute multi-step navigation and comprehensive full-text parsing, synthesiz-ing context-specific knowledge graphs. We envision that this addition will enhance the system’s adaptability to less-studied biological domains. Second, the reliance on proprietary, cloud-based LLMs introduces substantial operational bottlenecks. Profiling approximately 1,000 ROIs in our DKD cohort consumed roughly 3 mil-lion completion tokens (Supplementary Table B1), imposing financial barriers to large-scale studies. A practical optimization is a hybrid model routing architec-ture: retaining highly capable proprietary models for complex tasks (e.g., global planning and Deep Research), while migrating computationally intensive, high-throughput ROI interpretations to locally deployed, open-weight language models. This approach will substantially reduce operational costs while mitigating the repro-ducibility issues caused by silent backend updates of closed-source LLMs. Third, while the underlying agentic framework of OmicsNavigator can adapt to diverse data modalities, conducting joint reasoning across spatial multi-omics introduces more biological complexity and data alignment challenges. Future iterations may further enhance the Background Knowledge Checklists and interpretation modules to inte-grate information from multiple perspectives—gene expression, protein expression, metabolites—thereby cross-validating overlapping yet heterogeneous molecular layers. This will facilitate the construction of a more comprehensive and robust understanding of the tissue landscape. The landscape of agentic scientific research is rapidly evolving with the emer-gence of highly capable, general-purpose systems (e.g., Claude Code). Leveraging these generic coding engines represents a promising trend in the further development of agentic scientific partners, as they demonstrate remarkable proficiency in planning and executing analysis pipelines when provided with structured data. In our experiments, directly deploying these generic agents in spatial omics studies still faces certain lim-itations, including hallucinations due to a lack of reliable prior biological knowledge and a pronounced bias towards using only the data tables while neglecting spatial contexts and visual morphology. From this perspective, the domain-specific designs in OmicsNavigator —reasoning guardrails via checklists and blueprint, spatially aware data interpretation and retrieval capabilities—provide complementary solutions. By packaging these capabilities into modular components—effectively serving as domain-specific “skills” or tool-calling functions for generic engines—developers can harness the best of both paradigms. This synergistic integration points toward the next gen-eration of scientific tools: universally capable systems anchored and supported by domain-specific knowledge and skills. 11 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As spatial technologies continue to map tissues at unprecedented scales, simply accumulating more data will not bridge the interpretation gap. Instead, we show in this study that agentic AI applications can enable spatially aware, objective data exploration and hypothesis validation at scale. This ongoing transition from using AI as computational technicians to AI as research partners will greatly expand the capabilities of human researchers and accelerate future discoveries in spatial biology. 

# 4 Methods 

## 4.1 Data Acquisition 

4.1.1 Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) dataset 

We used a previously published CODEX dataset of kidney samples from diabetic patients [33], hereinafter referred to as the DKD dataset. A total of 17 regions com-prising approximately 137,000 cells were used for OmicsNavigator experiments. These regions span multiple stages of diabetic kidney disease (early/DM to stage 3/DKD3) and exhibit a broad spectrum of disease-associated histological changes. Each region in the DKD dataset was preprocessed using a standard pipeline involv-ing cell segmentation, biomarker integration, and cell typing via Leiden clustering plus expert pathologist annotations, resulting in 11 identified cell types, including tubular, endothelial, immune, and other cells. Pathologist annotations of five major anatomical structures—proximal tubules, distal tubules, glomeruli, blood vessels, and interstitium—were used to evaluate OmicsNavigator ’s zero-shot annotation accuracy in subsequent experiments. Clinical staging labels (DM, DKD2A, etc.) were used in the hypothesis validation case study to uncover stage-dependent trajectories of diabetic glomerulopathy. 

4.1.2 Transplant rejection (TR) dataset 

We adapted a different kidney dataset [35] comprising samples profiled using CODEX from 5 normal and 7 transplant rejection kidney regions, hereinafter denoted as the TR dataset. In total, around 350,000 cells were identified and classified after the same preprocessing pipeline, yielding 20 different cell types including immune, tubular, fibroblast, and smooth muscle cells. The TR dataset was profiled using a different biomarker panel, with only 7 of the 52 markers (13%) overlapping with the DKD dataset. 

4.1.3 Kidney allograft rejection (KAR) dataset 

Another dataset consisting of 8 T cell-mediated and 8 antibody-mediated rejection kid-ney cases [34] was used in parallel to test the generalizability of OmicsNavigator . This dataset similarly utilized a different biomarker panel and contained around 558,000 cells across 13 distinct cell types, with a particular focus on immune populations within kidney structures. 12 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4.1.4 COVID-19 and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) dataset 

We utilized a previously published imaging mass cytometry (IMC) dataset of human pulmonary tissue from patients with different pathological conditions, including COVID-19 infection and ARDS [36]. The dataset targets the expression of 36 proteins to investigate the spatial architecture of acute lung injury, and to capture the tempo-ral progression of the disease from early to late stages based on the time of symptom onset. The COVID-19 dataset contained a total of around 395,000 cells from 157 IMC images, collected from 14 patients. The analysis pipeline identified key alveolar epithelial cells, different immune infiltrates (including macrophages and neutrophils), and mesenchymal/fibroblast populations. Pathologist annotations of major anatomi-cal structures—vessels, airway, alveolar space, etc.—were derived from a subsequent work [45] and used to evaluate OmicsNavigator ’s zero-shot annotation accuracy in subsequent experiments. Clinical labels (healthy, early infection, late infection) were used in the hypothesis validation case study to examine pathogenesis of pulmonary SARS-CoV-2 infection. Collectively, all four datasets utilized high-dimensional profiling techniques with customized biomarker panels using different technical platforms (immunofluorescence and mass spectrometry imaging). They encompassed different organ systems and disease phenotypes. Because cell segmentation and annotations were performed inde-pendently across the original studies, these pipelines yielded non-overlapping sets of cell types and features. OmicsNavigator operates on regions from each study in an independent, language-driven manner, thereby minimizing the influence of potential batch effects and panel discrepancies. Consequently, the interpretation and semantic search results generated by the system are directly comparable across studies. 

## 4.2 System Architecture and Agentic Orchestration 

OmicsNavigator operates as a multi-agent scientific partner. To mitigate the risk of circular reasoning and goal-drift typically observed in unconstrained, decentral-ized LLM networks, the cognitive workflow is orchestrated using a linear directed acyclic topology via the LangGraph framework. The system establishes a unidirec-tional chronological handoff across three isolated phases: Planning, Interpretation, and Analysis, separated by a human-in-the-loop (HITL) audit checkpoint .Inter-agent communication and memory management are standardized through a cen-tralized, stateful dictionary ( AgentState ). Rather than employing dynamic message passing, this unified state acts as an immutable ledger that flows sequentially through the pipeline, continuously checkpointed in-memory. 

OmicsNavigator is architected as a model-agnostic framework, decoupling the cognitive orchestration from any single proprietary LLM backend. To balance scien-tific creativity with analytical reproducibility across varied computational engines, 

OmicsNavigator implements a Stratified Cognitive Stochasticity Control strategy. For instance, when configured with the gemini-2.5-pro engine, exploratory agents (e.g., the DataAnalyst and LiteratureReviewer ) operate under modulated thermodynamic 13 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

parameters (temperature ∈ [0 .2, 0.5]) to facilitate sufficiently broad and comprehen-sive contextual exploration. Conversely, downstream analytical agents tasked with structural interpretation and mathematical validation are clamped to determinism (temperature = 0 .0, top p = 1 .0), thereby reducing variance during quantitative data extraction and maintaining methodological reproducibility. Long-term episodic memory for interpreted spatial structures is managed via a FAISS vector database. Natural language interpretations of Regions of Interest (ROIs) are vectorized utilizing the gemini-embedding-001 model. The resulting high-dimensional semantic embeddings ( D = 768) are evaluated using L2 distance metrics and immutably stored in FAISS. This architecture enables rapid, O(log N ) seman-tic retrieval for subsequent population-level queries and spatial expansion algorithms, bypassing redundant LLM inference overhead during hypothesis validation. 

## 4.3 Global Context Initialization 

To ensure biological fidelity and restrict unconstrained LLM hallucinations during localized reasoning, OmicsNavigator initiates the analytical workflow by establish-ing a global cognitive context. This Plan Module operates prior to any microscopic region-of-interest (ROI) interpretation, decoupling biological prior formulation from downstream statistical execution. The module deploys two specialized information-gathering agents. The DataAn-alyst accesses raw spatial omics matrices via the FastMCP protocol to perform context-aware exploratory data analysis. Beyond computing foundational metrics (e.g., cellular composition, molecular dynamic ranges, and spatial entropy), the Data-Analyst operates within a Closed-loop Statistical Reflection mechanism. Upon generating an initial quantitative profile, the agent self-evaluates the mathematical validity and biological feasibility of the report. If critical gaps are identified, the agent autonomously formulates targeted analytical scripts, executes them within an isolated Python sandbox, and integrates the findings. This iterative self-correction loop ensures the baseline metrics are dynamically tailored to the specific spatial heterogeneity of the target sample. Concurrently, the LiteratureReviewer retrieves verified patho-physiological priors. Rather than executing unconstrained programmatic searches, this agent parses the data profile to extract core metadata (e.g., highly expressed biomarker lists, unique cell types) and populates a highly structured semantic query template encompassing critical dimensions such as target microenvironments and expected mechanistic events. To transition from cognitive formulation to knowledge extraction, the LiteratureRe-viewer leverages native agentic web-browsing capabilities to execute targeted natural language queries derived from this template. By autonomously navigating and pars-ing primary evidence from authoritative biological repositories (e.g., NCBI, PubMed, and QuickGO), the agent synthesizes the extracted patho-physiological mechanisms and biomarker metadata into a comprehensive report. This execution logic ensures that the subsequently generated biological constraints are grounded in context-aware, peer-reviewed scientific literature rather than the unverified parametric memory of the LLM. 14 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The gathered global statistics and literature priors are synthesized by the cen-tral Planner agent to orchestrate all downstream interactions. A critical output of this synthesis is the generation of a comprehensive domain-specific heuristic manual, instantiated as four distinct constraint checklists ( VisualProfiler checklist.md ,

OmicsProfiler checklist.md , Disease Relevance Score Rubrics Checklist , and 

OmicsInterpreter checklist.md ). These documents inject biological priors into the downstream Interpretation Module—for instance, explicitly defining channel-specific visual cues or establishing conflict resolution typologies (e.g., prioritizing morpholog-ical degradation over static molecular alterations in early-stage lesions). This ensures cross-modal discrepancies are resolved using grounded patho-physiological logic. Furthermore, to enforce statistical rigor during hypothesis validation, the Planner 

generates a Verification Blueprint.json . At this critical juncture, OmicsNavigator 

suspends autonomous execution to enforce a HITL pre-analytical audit. Researchers are presented with the generated heuristic checklists and the blueprint to systemati-cally review the intended analytical workflow. This “Plan Mode” architecture allows domain experts to verify the extracted biological priors, inject supplementary con-straints, and correct potential misalignments before any computationally expensive procedures occur. Upon receiving explicit human confirmation, the blueprint tran-sitions into a pre-registration document. Before any quantitative ROI evaluation commences, it locks the target statistical variables, cohort inclusion/exclusion criteria, and the declarative topology of the statistical testing DAG. 

## 4.4 Multi-modal Interpretation Engine 

At the core of OmicsNavigator is the Multi-modal Interpretation Engine, a sequential pipeline designed to process selected ROIs by synergizing morphological features with high-dimensional molecular signatures. 

4.4.1 VisualProfiler 

The VisualProfiler is tasked with extracting morphological features and structural inferences from imaging data (e.g., multiplexed immunofluorescence). To provide the vision-language model with both precise cellular details and broader spatial context, we employ a Dual-scale Visual Prompting strategy. For each Anchor ROI, the agent receives two distinct image inputs: 1. A macroscopic contextual field-of-view (FOV), generated by downsampling the raw multi-channel image to a 512 × 512 pixel resolution, with the target ROI delineated by a bounding box to reveal its immediate tissue neighborhood. 2. A high-resolution, 512 × 512 pixel zoomed-in crop of the exact ROI boundaries. Guided by the explicitly injected VisualProfiler checklist.md (which dictates channel-specific visual cues), this dual-input strategy ensures the model accurately infers complex anatomical structures while contextualizing local morphology within the global tissue architecture. 15 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4.4.2 OmicsProfiler 

The OmicsProfiler translates quantitative, high-dimensional molecular matrices into discrete natural language representations via an Omics-to-Text Encoding algorithm. To establish a spatially-weighted baseline expression profile resilient to variations in cellular density, OmicsNavigator constructs a reference distribution through a three-step stochastic spatial sampling algorithm: 1. Global Sliding Window Partitioning: The entire spatial region is exhaustively partitioned using a sliding grid approach (patch size = 128 × 128 pixels, stride ratio = 0 .5). 2. Density Filtering and Hard Capping: Sparse patches containing fewer than 

nmin = 5 cells are discarded. For dense patches exceeding nmax = 50 cells, the system enforces a hard cap by uniformly sampling exactly 50 cells. This step guar-antees that the contribution of any microenvironment to the global baseline is proportional to its physical spatial area rather than its absolute cellular abundance. 3. Stochastic Reference Assembly: From the filtered candidate pool, N = 1000 patches are stochastically sampled without replacement. The aggregated samples constitute the robust Reference Subset. For a target ROI i and biomarker g, let xi,g denote the initial normalized expres-sion. The spatially-weighted background context is established by calculating the mean 

μg and standard deviation σg across the Reference Subset. To handle the extreme sparsity and zero-variance artifacts inherent to spatial omics data (where a rare biomarker might exhibit σg = 0 within the reference pool), we implement a regularized generalized Z-score defined as: 

Zi,g = xi,g − μg

σg + ϵ

where ϵ is a positive regularization constant (set to ϵ = 10 −8). To categorize biomarker expression, OmicsNavigator employs a composite thresh-olding strategy. Guided by the OmicsProfiler checklist.md , a biomarker g is assigned semantic descriptors according to the following logic: 

• Highly Expressed: The biomarker satisfies at least one of the following: local 

Zi,g > 1.5, expression above the 90th percentile of the Reference Subset distribution, or it ranks among the top 2 highest expressed markers in the target cell. 

• Lowly Expressed: The biomarker is not categorized as highly expressed, and satisfies either Zi,g < −1.5 or falls below the 10th percentile of the Reference Subset distribution. 

• Moderately Expressed: Biomarkers not meeting the aforementioned thresholds. 

4.4.3 OmicsInterpreter 

The OmicsInterpreter synthesizes the visual inferences from the VisualProfiler and the textual omics matrices from the OmicsProfiler using a context-aware Late Fusion paradigm. Rather than executing unconstrained logical deductions, the interpreter’s 16 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cognitive space is governed by the OmicsInterpreter checklist.md generated dur-ing the initial Plan Phase. Guided by these grounded biological priors, the agent resolves cross-modal conflicts for the Anchor ROIs, generating a structured JSON report containing the inferred identity and a cognitive confidence score. Concurrently, to facilitate downstream patient-level disease trajectory reconstruc-tion, the OmicsInterpreter quantifies a localized Disease Relevance Score (rang-ing from 0 to 100). This continuous severity metric is dynamically governed by a Disease Relevance Score Rubrics Checklist . Ultimately, the inferred identity, confidence score, and disease relevance metric are vectorized and stored within the FAISS database, completing the episodic memory integration. 

## 4.5 Scalable Retrieval via Cluster-Anchor-Expand 

To overcome the computational bottleneck of querying the LLM for every individ-ual ROI across gigapixel tissue landscapes, OmicsNavigator employs a highly scalable “Cluster-Anchor-Expand” algorithmic framework. This approach distills cohort-scale landscapes into a minimal set of representative Anchor ROIs for deep semantic interpretation, followed by dynamic spatial expansion during the retrieval phase. 

4.5.1 Multi-modal Featurization and Robust Scaling 

To manage the memory constraints associated with Whole Slide Images (WSIs) and mitigate localized batch effects, the tissue landscape is initially partitioned into distinct geographic shards (instantiated as RegionShardData ). Within each shard, for every ROI, the system constructs a concatenated multi-modal feature vector v ∈ RD that encapsulates both morphological and molecular states. The vector is derived from four independent feature matrices: image-level intensity histograms ( Fimg ), mean cellular biomarker expression ( Fbm ), normalized cell-type frequency distributions ( Ftype ), and mean cellular morphological metrics ( Fmorph ). To address dimensional and scaling discrepancies across these heterogeneous modalities, we apply a normalization protocol prior to concatenation. For each modal-ity m ∈ { img, bm, type, morph }, let Dm denote its pairwise Euclidean distance matrix across all ROIs within the shard. The normalized feature matrix F ′ 

> m

is computed as: 

F ′ 

> m

= wm

Fm

Q95 (Dm)where wm serves as a predefined modality weight, and Q95 (Dm) represents the 95th percentile of the upper triangular elements of Dm. This quantile-based scaling fac-tor harmonizes global variance across modalities while preserving robustness against extreme biological outliers. The final representation for each ROI is the concatenated vector v = [ F ′ 

> img

∥ F ′ 

> bm

∥ F ′ 

> type

∥ F ′

> morph

]. 

Spatial Geometric Stratification. To ensure that the subsequently sampled Anchor ROIs are geographically dispersed across the tissue landscape rather than heavily localized within a single dense region, a secondary spatial partitioning step is introduced. Specifically, a K-Means algorithm is applied explicitly to the xy -spatial coordinates of the ROIs within each primary phenotypic cluster. The number 17 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of geometric partitions ( Kspatial ) is adaptively parameterized based on the physi-cal dimensions of the target tissue shard (e.g., Kspatial = 3 for standard regions). While this centroid-based approach does not delineate exact, density-based anatom-ical boundaries, it acts as a geographic stratifier—segmenting the widely distributed phenotypic cluster into distinct geometric sectors (i.e., spatial quadrants). This spatial stratification forces the downstream stochastic sampling mechanism to draw represen-tative anchors from diverse physical territories of the tissue shard, thereby mitigating regional sampling bias. 

4.5.2 Distance-Weighted Stochastic Anchor Sampling 

To select representative Anchor ROIs for LLM interpretation, we eschew nearest-centroid selection to avoid sampling unrepresentative edge cases. Instead, we imple-ment a distance-weighted stochastic sampling mechanism coupled with dense-core truncation. For a given sub-cluster containing N ROIs, let ˜ v denote the component-wise median feature vector. The phenotypic Euclidean distance for the i-th ROI is calculated as 

di = ∥vi − ˜v∥2. An initial inverse-distance probability vector p is formulated as pi = 

> 1
> di+ϵ

.To restrict sampling to the core phenotypic identity of the cluster, we apply a hard median truncation, zeroing out the selection probability of any ROI falling outside the top 50% of phenotypic proximity to the median. The truncated probability p′ 

> i

is defined as: 

p′ 

> i

= max(0 , p i − median( p)) Finally, a non-linear probability sharpening step is applied via squaring (( p′

> i

)2)to disproportionately amplify the sampling likelihood of ROIs situated closest to the phenotypic core. The ultimate sampling probability P (i) for the i-th ROI is defined by the following normalization: 

P (i) = (p′

> i

)2

PNj=1 (p′ 

> j

)2

Using this distribution, a target number of Anchor ROIs ( k) is sampled without replacement from each sub-cluster. This sampling depth is parameterized as an adapt-able hyperparameter (e.g., k = 2 is utilized for the standard tissue cohorts evaluated in this study). 

4.5.3 Dynamic Expand-on-Hit Retrieval 

These sampled Anchor ROIs are the targets dispatched to the Multi-modal Inter-pretation Engine, and only their resultant semantic interpretations are vectorized into the FAISS database. OmicsNavigator bypasses premature, global label propaga-tion. Instead, the “Expand” phase operates dynamically within the SemanticRetriever 

agent during the querying phase. When a user’s natural language query semantically matches a specific Anchor ROI within the FAISS index, the system executes an “Expand-on-hit” operation. It 18 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

utilizes the SpatialPivotRegistry to trace the hit back to its original sub-cluster and conditionally propagates the relevance score to its geographic members. This lazy-evaluation architecture enables robust patient-level statistical aggregations with-out incurring the prohibitive token costs or vector database bloat associated with exhaustively computing LLM interpretations for hundreds of thousands of individual cells. 

## 4.6 Statistical Hypothesis Validation 

To balance the necessity of dynamically adapting to diverse spatial omics experimen-tal designs with strict objectivity, OmicsNavigator employs a decoupled hypothesis validation engine. The architecture separates analytical strategy formulation from mathematical execution and final semantic synthesis, thereby harnessing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs while mitigating algorithmic p-hacking. 

Autonomous Analytical Planning and Pre-registration. During the ini-tial Plan Phase, the Planner agent autonomously architects a bespoke statistical strategy tailored to the specific study. To prevent algorithmic data-snooping, the 

Planner is isolated from the raw expression matrices and relies on the quantitative profile and baseline metrics generated by the upstream DataAnalyst . By parsing this context-aware exploratory report, the Planner evaluates the global structural topol-ogy and clinical metadata—such as cohort scale, hierarchical nesting (e.g., multiple regions sampled per patient), and the nature of clinical variables. Based on these architectural properties, the Planner synthesizes its comprehensive knowledge of sci-entific computing libraries (e.g., scipy.stats , statsmodels ) to autonomously define the optimal mathematical modeling approach. For instance, upon detecting high technical-to-biological replicate ratios, it formulates Linear Mixed Models (LMM, e.g., 

F eature ∼ Stage +(1 |P atient ID )) to account for intra-patient variance and quantify Intraclass Correlation (ICC). This logic, alongside explicitly logged fallback edges and False Discovery Rate (FDR) parameters, is structured into a formal Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) and serialized into the Verification Blueprint.json . Following an HITL audit, this blueprint transitions into a pre-registration document, locking the statistical methodology before any quantitative hypothesis evaluation commences. 

Execution and Context-Aware Synthesis. In the validation phase, a com-putational node traverses the pre-registered DAG, executing the prescribed formulas and applying global FDR control (via the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure) to all ter-minal p-values. Upon completion, the system re-engages the reasoning capabilities of the HypothesisValidator agent. The statistical facts—comprising FDR-corrected p-values, ICCs, and trajectory coefficients—are passed to the agent as a factual matrix. Operating as an intelligent evaluator, the HypothesisValidator analyzes these mathe-matical results within the broader spatial and biological context. It synthesizes these facts to formulate the final scientific evaluation (e.g., VERIFIED or REFUTED ), extract-ing nuanced insights such as contextualizing high spatial variance (high ICC) as patient-specific resilience, or interpreting misaligned coefficient peaks as evidence of an asynchronous biological cascade. Because the agent cannot alter the upstream execution DAG or the resulting metrics, its autonomy is confined to contextual 19 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

interpretation grounded strictly in verified data. The final output is a comprehen-sive natural language summary ( validation report.md ) that explicitly couples the agent’s contextual reasoning side-by-side with the raw statistical evidence, ensuring complete transparency for human expert review. 

## 4.7 Evaluation Metrics 

To assess the performance of OmicsNavigator across both zero-shot interpretation and semantic retrieval tasks, we established ground truth human annotations aggregated from the original cell-level metadata of the respective datasets. 

4.7.1 Zero-Shot Annotation Accuracy 

For macroscopic structural interpretation, performance was evaluated utilizing the Macro F1-score to ensure minority phenotypic classes were equally represented. Given that the underlying datasets inherently provide annotations at the single-cell level, the structural ground truth for any evaluated Region of Interest (ROI) was established via a plurality vote. Consequently, the ROI-level semantic prediction generated by Omic-sNavigator was recorded as a True Positive when it perfectly matched this aggregated ROI ground truth. The Macro F1-score is defined as the unweighted arithmetic mean of the class-specific F1-scores across all valid semantic classes C:Macro F1 = 1

|C|

X

> c∈C

2 × Precision c × Recall c

Precision c + Recall c

where Precision c and Recall c correspond to the precision and recall computed independently for each tissue architecture class c.

4.7.2 Semantic Retrieval Performance 

To evaluate the system’s capacity to accurately rank and retrieve phenotypically rel-evant microenvironments based on natural language queries, we utilized the Mean Average Precision at K (mAP @K). A retrieved ROI was classified as a relevant True Positive hit if its aggregated ground-truth label aligned with the target semantic intent of the query. The metric is defined as the mean of the Average Precision scores across all queries: 

mAP @K = 1

|Q|

X

> q∈Q

AP @K(q)where Q represents the exhaustive set of standardized semantic queries, and K denotes the predefined rank cutoff for the retrieval list. The Average Precision at K for a specific query q, denoted as AP @K(q), is explicitly formulated as: 

AP @K(q) = 

PKk=1 P (k) × rel (k)min( K, N q )20 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In this formulation, P (k) is the precision computed at cutoff rank k, rel (k) is an indicator function equating to 1 if the item at rank k is a relevant True Positive and 0 otherwise, and Nq denotes the total number of actual relevant ROIs for query q

existing within the entire database. 

## 4.8 Code and Data Availability 

The code and data of OmicsNavigator are available at https://github.com/yyli-leo/ OmicsNavigator. Public datasets used in this study can be accessed at: 

• Kidney studies: https://zenodo.org/records/12682727 

• Healthy lung tissues: https://zenodo.org/records/6376767 

• SARS-CoV-2 infected lung tissues: https://zenodo.org/records/4110560 21 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Main Figures 

Fig. 1 OmicsNavigator architecture: A modular autonomous agentic system for end-to-end spatial omics data exploration and hypothesis validation. (a) The Plan Module. A central Planner Agent parses natural language queries and hypotheses. It establishes domain-specific biological priors by coordinating a LiteratureReviewer for knowledge extraction and a DataAnalyst for initial profiling of data baselines. (b) The Interpretation Module. This module introduces a dual-channel profiling mechanism to prompt a VisualProfiler that extracts visual morphology features and an OmicsProfiler 

that extracts molecular signatures as structured natural language descriptions. These streams are subsequently synthesized by the OmicsInterpreter , which utilizes domain-specific biological priors to provide interpretations. (c) The Analysis Module. This module contains a SemanticRetriever to conduct retrieval of hypothesis-related spatial structures, and a HypothesisValidator to synthesize preceding outputs and perform statistical validations. Following the execution plan (i.e., Verification Blueprint ) established by the Planner , this module generates a detailed report to validate or refute user hypothesis. 

22 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 2 Intelligent multi-modal interpretation via dual-channel profiling and fusion. (a) Schematic of the interpretation module’s pipeline. The dual-channel profiling mechanism extracts descriptive features from two parallel input streams—visual morphology and molecular profiles—which are sub-sequently fused. This schematic also highlights the injection of Background Knowledge Checklists 

to ground agentic reasoning. (b) Representative annotations of a human kidney tissue section. 

OmicsInterpreter accurately identifies complex structures such as glomeruli, tubular structures, and disease-induced inflammation domains. (c) Ablation study demonstrating the contribution of multi-modality. Uni-modal baselines exhibit specific failure modes: visual-only interpretation (top) confuses early interstitial fibrosis with edema due to morphological similarity; Omics-only interpretation (bottom) is confused by the overlapping biomarker expression. The fused interpretation by OmicsIn-terpreter (center) correctly synthesizes both cues to derive the correct conclusion. (d-f) Quantitative benchmarking. F1 scores for zero-shot structural annotations against human labeled ground truth on diabetic kidney disease (DKD) (d), healthy lung (e), and SARS-CoV-2-infected lung (f) datasets. 

23 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 3 High-throughput semantic retrieval via the Cluster-Anchor-Expand strategy. (a) Schematic of the retrieval engine. To process large-scale data, the system groups ROIs, interprets representative ROIs, retrieves hits relevant to user queries, and uses them as anchors to expand semantic tags to cover the entire study. (b-c) Retrieval examples for canonical structures of glomeruli (b) and distal convoluted tubules (c) across three different spatial omics studies from different institutions, patholo-gies, and biomarker panels. Mean average precision at k (mAP@k) curves, precision@60, recall@60 metrics are calculated on the DKD cohort, where OmicsNavigator achieved strong performances. (d) Discovery of disease-associated spatial biomarkers using targeted queries for “Immune Aggregates”. The quantities of retrieved ROIs correlate strongly with pathologist-assigned stages or inflammation levels across all three studies. 

24 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 4 Patient-level disease state reconstruction and clinical stratification. (a) Progression of DKD across regions. By executing an aggregation pipeline on disease-relevant ROIs (relevance score ≥ 80), 

OmicsNavigator tracks the collective accumulation of disease severity. The quantitative count shows a statistically significant, stepwise increase from early-stage to late-stage ( p < 0.001). Synthesized patient-level summaries capture the biological transition from initiation of structural degradation to severe immune-mediated destruction along with interstitial fibrosis. (b) Identification of kid-ney changes due to transplant rejection. OmicsNavigator distinguishes regions from acute rejection patients from normal baselines ( p < 0.001). The semantic summaries explicitly contrast the immune quiescence and structural integrity in healthy tissues against severe host-versus-graft damage dom-inated by acute immune storms in transplant rejection samples. (c) Characterization of pulmonary SARS-CoV-2 infection. OmicsNavigator maps the progressive accumulation of disease-relevant ROIs, establishing a severity gradient from the healthy baseline to early and late-stage infection ( p < 0.001). Semantic summaries identify the shift from localized early viral assault to pan-tissue macrophage enrichment and compartmentalized alveolar fibrosis. (d) Identification of pathological changes in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). OmicsNavigator separates ARDS samples from healthy base-lines ( p < 0.001). Its semantic summary identifies aberrant proliferative repair, vascular injury, and macrophage enrichment. Statistical analysis: For multi-group comparisons (panels a and c), statistical significance is determined using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test. For two-group comparisons (panels b and d), significance is assessed using an independent Student’s t-test. 

25 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 5 Autonomous hypothesis validations of spatially resolved disease dynamics. (a) Hypothesis validation regarding diabetic glomerulopathy in the DKD study. The system processed a natural lan-guage hypothesis regarding the monotonic trend of structural decline, cellular stress, and immune infiltration. Operating under the Verification Blueprint , HypothesisValidator utilized a Linear Mixed Model (LMM) to model the stage-dependent dynamics. It provided data-driven insights, iden-tifying CD68+ macrophage recruitment as a highly significant, monotonic trajectory, while suggesting that structural decline (Nestin) was heavily influenced by inter-patient variance. Trend plots map-ping these markers across disease stages were automatically generated to support the findings. (b) Hypothesis validation regarding compartmentalized pathogenesis in the COVID-19 pulmonary tissue study. The system executed retrieval to decouple alveolar space and vascular ROIs. HypothesisVal-idator found that fibrotic scarring is compartmentalized to the alveolar space, while macrophage enrichment is a ubiquitous, pan-compartmental event. Alveolar neutrophils showed high heterogene-ity (ICC = 60.8%); after adjustment, the patient-level association became non-significant. Plots were automatically generated to support the findings. 

26 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Appendix A Supplementary Figures 

Supplementary Fig. 1 Deterministic execution pipeline via Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) for autonomous hypothesis validation. This schematic visualizes a representative hard-coded mathematical topology governing the HypothesisValidator agent. The execution logic is predefined and constrained by the pre-registered Verification Blueprint (Supplementary Note B.3). Upon data ingestion (N1), the system filters Regions of Interest based on pre-registered topologi-cal criteria (N2) and performs pseudobulking (N3). The statistical routing (N4) dynamically routes comparative data through a decision tree guided by objective assumption checks: Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (N4a) and Levene’s test for homoscedasticity (N4b). Based on these Boolean out-comes, data are evaluated via Mann-Whitney U test, Student’s t-test, or Welch’s t-test, followed by a Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction (N5). The final empirical metrics are structured into a read-only verified JSON output (N6). 

27 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. 2 Ablation analysis demonstrating the critical impact of autonomously gener-ated biological priors on interpretation accuracy. Dumbbell plots illustrating the zero-shot structural annotation performance (Macro F1-score) across three distinct tissue datasets: Kidney (left), Healthy Lung (center), and COVID-19 Infected Lung (right). Performance is systematically benchmarked across four state-of-the-art foundational models (Claude-4-Sonnet, GPT-5, Grok-4, and Gemini-2.5-Pro). Colors denote the input modality: Omics-only (grey), Visual-only (blue), and Omics-Visual fusion (red). Open circles ( ◦) indicate the baseline baseline performance of unconstrained models without background knowledge. Solid circles ( •) represent the performance of models guided by the autonomously generated Background Knowledge Checklists . The vertical connecting lines visualize the performance gain achieved through knowledge injection. The results reveal a universal and sub-stantial improvement in annotation accuracy across all data modalities, model architectures, and biological contexts when domain-specific priors are introduced. Notably, the complete OmicsNavi-gator configuration (multi-modal fusion with background knowledge; solid red circles) consistently yields the highest F1 scores, underscoring the necessity of the Plan Module in anchoring agentic rea-soning and mitigating LLM hallucinations. 

28 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. 3 The Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) graphical interface for pre-execution audit and hypothesis pre-registration. The OmicsNavigator user interface (UI) is designed to enforce trans-parency, mitigate black-box risks, and establish analytical guardrails prior to large-scale computation. The interface consists of three functional panels during Phase I (Plan Module). (a) Configuration and State Monitoring (Left Panel). Researchers define the spatial data paths, select the underlying LLM architecture, and input the natural language hypothesis. (b) Agentic Reasoning and Litera-ture Retrieval (Center Panel). A real-time API Logger tracks the token consumption, latency, and tool-use behaviors of the DataAnalyst and LiteratureReviewer agents. The retrieved, context-aware biological literature backing the derived heuristics is displayed with direct links. (c) The Audit Interface and Pre-registration (Right Panel). Before any micro-scale ROI interpretation or statisti-cal analysis commences, the human researcher is mandated to review the autonomously generated outputs. This includes the four editable Background Knowledge Checklists (top right) and the 

Verification Blueprint (bottom right). The blueprint transparently displays the locked target vari-ables, expected biological trends, and the deterministic Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) statistical routing. By explicitly clicking the “Approve & Lock Blueprint” button, the researcher locks the con-figurations, transitioning them into read-only, pre-registered documents. 

29 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint Appendix B Supplementary Notes 

## B.1 Computational efficiency and resource consumption 

Supplementary Table B1 Resource Consumption and Cost Estimation of OmicsNavigator. 

Performance metrics are benchmarks conducted on the Diabetic Kidney Disease (DKD) dataset using the Gemini-2.5-Pro engine. Cost estimations are calculated based on the specific context window and caching pricing models at the time of execution. Note that metrics for the Interpretation Module represent the cost associated with a single Region of Interest (ROI).                   

> Phase Token Usage API Latency (s) Estimated Cost (USD) Uncached Input Cached Input Completion
> Plan Module 9000 028000 800 $0.29 Interpretation Module a2000 4500 3000 46 $0.05 Analysis Module 2500 06000 60 $0.06 a

Metrics for the Interpretation Module are reported per ROI . Total session cost scales linearly with the number of queried ROIs. 

Note: Cost estimations are based on Gemini-2.5-Pro pricing: Input $1.25–2.50/1M tokens, Output 

$10.00–15.00/1M tokens, and Context Caching $0.125–0.25/1M tokens, depending on context length ( <

or > 200k tokens). 

## B.2 Background Knowledge Checklists 

OmicsProfiler Checklist 

# Background Checklist (Molecular Cues) ### Proximal Tubules * **Enriched:** Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**) * **Sparse:** Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**), Smooth muscle cells (**aSMA+**) ,→

### Distal Tubules * **Enriched:** Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**) * **Sparse:** Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**) ### Glomeruli * **Enriched:** Endothelial cells (**CD31+**/**CD196+**), Nestin+ cells (**nestin+**) ,→

* **Sparse:** Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**), Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**) ,→

### Blood Vessels * **Enriched:** Smooth muscle cells (**aSMA+**) * **Sparse:** Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**), Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**) ,→

30 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint ### Interstitium * **Enriched:** Endothelial cells (**CD31+**/**CD196+**), Low expressing cells, Immune cells (**CD45+**/**CD68+**/**CD11b+**) ,→

* **Sparse:** Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**), Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**) ,→

VisualProfiler Checklist 

# Checklist (Channel-Specific Visual Cues) ### Glomeruli * **Core Signal:** Red (**Nestin**)+ in a reticular or linear pattern, outlining the capillary tuft (podocyte marker). ,→

* **Boundary:** Enclosed within a distinct Magenta (**Perlecan**) / Grey (**Collagen IV**) ring (Bowman's capsule). ,→

* **Note:** Typically lacks internal Green (**CD227**) signal. ### Distal Tubules / Collecting Ducts (DT/CD) * **Core Signal:** Strong Green (**CD227**/**MUC1**)+, often distinctively outlining the apical/luminal surface. ,→

* **Morphology:** Smaller caliber with a regular, circular lumen. * **Boundary:** Defined by a clear Magenta/Grey basement membrane ring. ### Proximal Tubules (PT) * **Core Signal:** Negative for Green (**CD227**) (key differentiator from DT/CD). ,→

* **Morphology:** Larger caliber with an irregular or stellate lumen; cytoplasm filled with diffuse Blue (**CD183**) signal. ,→

* **Boundary:** Outlined by Magenta/Grey basement membranes; closely packed architecture. ,→

### Blood Vessels (Arteries/Arterioles) * **Core Signal:** Strong Cyan (**aSMA**)+ forming a thick, continuous concentric ring (vascular smooth muscle). ,→

* **Boundary:** Multi-layered, concentric Magenta/Grey (**Perlecan**/**ColIV**) structures. ,→

* **Lumen:** Smooth, acellular central opening. ### Interstitium * **Immune Cells:** Scattered or clustered Yellow (**CD45**)+ punctate signals. ,→

* **Fibrosis/Matrix:** Non-vascular Cyan (**aSMA**)+ fibrils (myofibroblasts) or diffusely expanded Magenta/Grey matrix areas. ,→

* **Location:** The space between adjacent tubules or between tubules and glomeruli. ,→

31 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

OmicsInterpreter Checklist 

# Background Checklist: Cross-Modal Alignment & Conflict Resolution As the OmicsInterpreter, you must evaluate the reliability of the VisualProfiler (Morphology) and OmicsProfiler (Molecular Signatures) based on the structural characteristics. Use the following rules to resolve discrepancies: 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

### 1. Glomeruli (High Visual Reliability) * **Conflict Rule:** Visual morphology is the gold standard. If the VisualProfiler detects a distinct Bowman's capsule (Magenta/Grey ring) and reticular capillary tufts (Red/Nestin), prioritize it as Glomeruli, even if the OmicsProfiler signal is weak. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

* **Alignment:** Omics should ideally confirm Endothelial (**CD31+**) and **Nestin+** cells. ,→

### 2. Blood Vessels (Structure vs. Cell Type Disambiguation) * **Conflict Rule:** OmicsProfiler detects Smooth Muscle Cells (**aSMA+**), but aSMA is also present in fibrotic Interstitium. To confirm a Blood Vessel, you MUST rely on the VisualProfiler's structural observation of "thick, continuous concentric rings" and a "smooth, acellular central opening." 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

* **Alignment:** If Omics says **aSMA+** but Visual sees non-vascular scattered fibrils without a lumen, rule out Blood Vessel and lean towards Interstitium (fibrosis). 

> ,→
> ,→

### 3. Interstitium vs. Proximal Tubules (High Omics Reliability) * **Conflict Rule:** The VisualProfiler frequently struggles to define the boundaries between tightly packed Proximal Tubules and the extremely narrow Interstitium space, often hallucinating one as the other. In this scenario, strongly trust the OmicsProfiler. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

* **Alignment:** If OmicsProfiler detects enriched Immune cells (**CD45+**/**CD68+**/**CD11b+**) and Endothelial cells, and critically, SPARSE Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**), the region is Interstitium, regardless of visual boundary ambiguity. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

### 4. Proximal Tubules (PT) vs. Distal Tubules (DT) (High Omics Reliability) ,→

* **Conflict Rule:** Visually distinguishing PT from DT can be challenging if lumens are poorly sectioned. Rely heavily on the OmicsProfiler for subtyping. 

> ,→
> ,→

* **Alignment:** If Omics shows enriched Tubular cells (**CD183++**/**CD227-**) and sparse Distal tubular cells (**CD227+**), it is unequivocally Proximal Tubules. If Omics shows enriched **CD227+** cells, it is Distal Tubules. Visual confirmation of lumen size/shape is secondary. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

32 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Disease Relevance Score Rubric 

# Disease Relevance Score Rubrics Checklist (DKD Spatiotemporal Progression) ,→

## Objective for OmicsInterpreter Your task is to assign a strictly quantitative **Disease Relevance Score (0-100)** to a given Region of Interest (ROI) based on its omics and spatial phenotype. This score reflects the ROI's progression along the Diabetic Kidney Disease (DKD) spatiotemporal axis|from healthy homeostasis to terminal fibrotic scarring. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

---## Score Tiers and Phenotypic Criteria ### Tier 1: Healthy Homeostasis / Non-Lesional (Score: 0 - 20) **Pathological State:** Functional proximal tubules and intact microenvironment. No significant DKD relevance. ,→

* **Omics Signatures:** * High expression of viability/metabolic markers: `ACE2`, `TFAM`. ,→

* Strictly basolateral `EpCAM`. * Negative or negligible stress/fibrosis markers: `Clusterin`, `aSMA`. ,→

* **Spatial & Tissue Context:** * Intact tubular structures with tightly packed, organized `DAPI` nuclei. ,→

* Thin, continuous basement membranes (low/normal `CollagenIV`, `Perlecan`). ,→

* Rich, healthy peritubular capillary networks (`CD31+`, `VWF+`). * Absence of immune clusters (`CD45-`, `CD68-`). ### Tier 2: Early Metabolic Stress & Matrix Remodeling (Score: 21 - 40) **Pathological State:** The onset of "Hidden Damage". Tubules are morphologically intact but begin to experience metabolic shift and matrix overproduction. 

> ,→
> ,→

* **Omics Signatures:** * Observable downregulation of `ACE2` and `TFAM`. * Mild to moderate upregulation of the molecular chaperone `Clusterin`. ,→

* Loss or reduction of complement regulatory proteins (`CD35`, `CD46`, `CD55`). ,→

* **Spatial & Tissue Context:** * Epithelial monolayer remains physically continuous. * **Key Spatial Feature:** Basement membrane thickening|intensely concentrated, continuous rings of `Perlecan` and `CollagenIV` tightly encircling the tubule. 

> ,→
> ,→

* No major expansion of `aSMA+` interstitial cells yet. ### Tier 3: The "Hidden Damage" & Innate Immune Niche (Score: 41 - 60) 

33 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

**Pathological State:** The critical inflection point. Tubules are under massive stress and are actively targeted by the innate immune system, yet architectural collapse has not fully occurred. 

> ,→
> ,→

* **Omics Signatures:** * **Peak `Clusterin` expression** (Hallmark of severe hidden damage). ,→

* Diffuse `EpCAM` expression (loss of cell polarity / early dedifferentiation). ,→

* Positive deposition of complement cascades: `C1QC`, `MASP2`, and terminal `SC5b9` on the epithelial surface. ,→

* **Spatial & Tissue Context:** * **Key Spatial Feature:** Dense halos of `CD68+` macrophages physically tethered to the basolateral surface of `Clusterin+` stressed tubules. 

> ,→
> ,→

* Local increase in anaphalatoxin receptors (`C3aR`, `C5aR`). ### Tier 4: Active Fibro-Inflammatory Execution (Score: 61 - 80) **Pathological State:** Epithelial death triggers massive pro-fibrotic signaling and active scarring. The structural integrity of the kidney is rapidly degrading. 

> ,→
> ,→

* **Omics Signatures:** * Emergence of specialized pro-fibrotic macrophages: `SPP1+`. * Surge in myofibroblast activation: Massive `aSMA+` and `bCatenin1+`. ,→

* High pan-leukocyte infiltration: `CD45+`. * Loss of `ACE2`, `TFAM`, and tubular `EpCAM`. * **Spatial & Tissue Context:** * **Key Spatial Feature:** Tubular dropout|loss of regular tubular rings, replaced by wide, chaotic bands of `aSMA+` cells. ,→

* Endothelial stress: Co-expression of `CD31+` and `CD196+` (activated vascular niche capturing leukocytes). ,→

### Tier 5: Terminal Fibrotic Scar & Vascular Rarefaction (Score: 81 -100) ,→

**Pathological State:** End-stage DKD microenvironment. The tissue is a hypoxic, dense scar dominated by aggressive fibroblasts and exhausted immune cells. 

> ,→
> ,→

* **Omics Signatures:** * Extreme, diffuse expression of `CollagenIV`. * Presence of highly aggressive myofibroblast subpopulations: `Nestin+`. ,→

* Severe T-cell exhaustion and chronic activation: `PD1+`, `ICOS+`, `CD38+`, `FoxP3+` (failing Tregs). ,→

* **Spatial & Tissue Context:** * Complete loss of organized `DAPI` epithelial structures. * **Key Spatial Feature:** Microvascular Rarefaction|dramatic reduction or total obliteration of `CD31+`/`VWF+` capillary networks within the dense scar. 

> ,→
> ,→

34 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

---## Scoring Rules & Interpolation Guidelines for OmicsInterpreter When assigning the final integer score (0-100), apply the following logic: ,→

1. **Anchor First:** Identify the highest-tier phenotype present in the ROI to determine the base range (e.g., if `SPP1+` macrophages and `aSMA` are present, base range is 61-80). 

> ,→
> ,→

2. **Density Modifier (Interpolation):** * If the pathogenic features occupy **< 30%** of the ROI area (focal lesion), assign a score at the **bottom** of the tier's range. ,→

* If the pathogenic features occupy **> 70%** of the ROI area (diffuse lesion), assign a score at the **top** of the tier's range. 

> ,→
> ,→

3. **The "Hidden Damage" Accelerator:** If an ROI exhibits intact morphology (which normally scores low) BUT shows massive `Clusterin` upregulation and `SC5b9` deposition, you MUST aggressively penalize the score and push it directly into **Tier 3 (41-60)**. Do not be fooled by intact structural appearance. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

4. **The Vascular Penalty:** Regardless of other features, if severe microvascular rarefaction (`CD31` dropout) is detected alongside fibrosis, automatically boost the score by **+15 points** (capped at 100), as hypoxia guarantees terminal progression. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

## B.3 Pre-registered Verification Blueprint 

Verification Blueprint 

{"hypothesis": { "id": "H_Diabetic_Glomerulopathy", "statement": "Diabetic glomerulopathy is characterized by a complex interplay of structural decline, cellular stress, and immune infiltration, which evolve monotonically across disease stages." 

> ,→
> ,→

}, "cohort_definition": { "inclusion_criteria": "ROIs containing cells labeled as 'Glomeruli'", ,→

"ordinal_stages": { "DM": 0, "DKD2A": 1, "DKD2A->B": 2, "Late_DKD": 3 

35 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

}, "nesting_structure": "ROIs nested within region_id (Patient)" }, "target_variables": [ {"name": "glomerular_nestin_intensity", "type": "marker_expression", "biological_proxy": "structural decline (podocyte integrity)", "expected_trend": "monotonic_decrease" }, {"name": "glomerular_clusterin_intensity", "type": "marker_expression", "biological_proxy": "cellular stress (proteotoxic stress)", "expected_trend": "monotonic_increase" }, {"name": "glomerular_cd68_intensity", "type": "marker_expression", "biological_proxy": "immune infiltration (macrophage recruitment)", ,→

"expected_trend": "monotonic_increase" }], "statistical_dag": { "nodes": [ {"id": "node_01_ingestion", "type": "data_extraction", "method": "filter_rois", "parameters": { "target_label": "Glomeruli", "features_to_extract": [ "Nestin", "Clusterin", "CD68" ]}}, {"id": "node_02_topology_audit", 

36 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

"type": "assumption_check", "method": "hierarchical_nesting_audit", "parameters": { "biological_replicate_id": "region_id", "technical_replicate_id": "roi_id" }}, {"id": "node_03_lmm_trend_engine", "type": "statistical_test", "method": "linear_mixed_model", "parameters": { "fixed_effects": "stage_index", "random_effects": "1 | region_id", "formula": "feature ~ stage_index", "calculate_icc": true }, "input": "node_02_topology_audit" }, {"id": "node_03_fallback_spearman", "type": "statistical_test", "method": "spearman_pseudobulk", "parameters": { "aggregation": "mean", "group_by": [ "region_id", "stage_index" ]}, "input": "node_02_topology_audit" }, {"id": "node_04_fdr_correction", "type": "multiple_testing_correction", "method": "fdr_bh", "parameters": { "alpha": 0.05 }, "input": [ "node_03_lmm_trend_engine", 

37 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

"node_03_fallback_spearman" ]}], "routing_logic": [ {"from": "node_03_lmm_trend_engine", "to": "node_04_fdr_correction", "condition": "convergence_warning == False" }, {"from": "node_03_lmm_trend_engine", "to": "node_03_fallback_spearman", "condition": "convergence_warning == True" }, {"from": "node_03_fallback_spearman", "to": "node_04_fdr_correction", "condition": "always" }]}}

## B.4 Agent Prompt Specifications 

System Prompt Specification for the DataAnalyst Agent 

You are a Spatial Omics Data Analyst specializing in analyzing multiplexed imaging fluorescence (MIF) datasets. ,→

Your expertise includes: 1. **Dataset Profiling**: Understanding data structure, dimensions, and quality ,→

2. **Sparsity Analysis**: Computing expression matrix zero density and statistics ,→

3. **Cellular Composition**: Determining cell type distributions across regions ,→

4. **Molecular Dynamic Range**: Analyzing percentile distributions and expression patterns ,→

5. **Quality Validation**: Ensuring analysis completeness and statistical validity ,→

38 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Available Tools: - **inspect_data_schema**: Examine the CSV structure, columns, and data types ,→

- **analyze_spatial_sample**: Get comprehensive statistical profile (cell count, biomarkers, composition, sparsity, percentiles) ,→

- **execute_analysis_script**: Run custom Python code for additional analysis (60s timeout) ,→

## Analysis Workflow: 1. **Initial Analysis**: Use inspect_data_schema and analyze_spatial_sample to gather data ,→

2. **Self-Validation**: Review your analysis for completeness and quality ,→

3. **Iterate if Needed**: If analysis is incomplete, use execute_analysis_script to gather missing information ,→

4. **Final Report**: Provide comprehensive, validated analysis ## Quality Standards (Tier 1 - Required): A passing analysis MUST include: - **Global Metadata**: Total cell count, available biomarkers, available cell types ,→

- **Cellular Composition**: Table with cell types showing absolute counts AND relative percentages ,→

- **Molecular Dynamic Range**: Sparsity metrics (zero-fraction) and percentile distributions (Min, Median, 95th, Max) ,→

## Important Guidelines: - Focus on factual data presentation only - Do NOT include biological interpretations or insights - Do NOT include recommendations for downstream analysis - Do NOT reference any hypothesis or biological questions ## Output Format: Provide analysis results in markdown format strictly adhering to the following: ,→

- Clear section headers using bold text. - Tabular representation for cellular composition and statistical distributions. ,→

- Precise reporting of key statistics (means, standard deviations, zero-fractions). ,→

- STRICTLY adhere to factual data presentation. No hypothesis generation, no biological interpretations, and no downstream recommendations. 

> ,→
> ,→

Be thorough but concise. Present the data accurately and clearly. 

39 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

System Prompt Specification for the LiteratureReviewer Agent 

You are a Scientific Literature Reviewer specializing in spatial biology, automated knowledge extraction, and multi-modal omics research. 

> ,→
> ,→

Your expertise includes: 1. **Literature Retrieval**: Finding relevant papers corresponding to specific biological domains and user hypotheses ,→

2. **Paper Summarization**: Extracting key findings, methodologies, and insights ,→

3. **Biological Priors**: Identifying established knowledge for hypothesis testing ,→

## Analysis Guidelines: 1. Focus on spatial transcriptomics, multiplexed imaging, and the specific biological context provided in the user's query (e.g., Target Organ, Target Disease) 

> ,→
> ,→

3. Prioritize recent papers (last 5-10 years) with high impact 4. Extract methodological insights applicable to spatial omics ## Input Context: You will receive the baseline Data Profile (generated by the DataAnalyst) including available cell types and high-variance biomarkers, along with the User Hypothesis. 

> ,→
> ,→

## Search Strategy: Do not perform generic searches. You MUST anchor your literature search to the actual biomarkers and cell types detected in the Data Profile. Ensure the extracted biological mechanisms map directly to the available high-dimensional data matrix. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

## Output Format for Each Paper: - **Title**: Full paper title - **Source**: Authors, Year, Journal - **Relevance**: Why this paper matters for the hypothesis - **Key Findings**: Main discoveries relevant to spatial omics - **Methodological Insights**: Techniques applicable to our analysis - **Biological Mechanisms**: Pathways and processes identified Provide 3-5 highly relevant papers with detailed summaries. 

System Prompt Specification for the Planner Agent 

You are the Principal Investigator (PI) responsible for designing rigorous spatial omics analysis plans. ,→

Your role is to: 

40 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1. **Extract Hypothesis Components**: Identify variables, comparisons, and expected trends ,→

2. **Design Verification Blueprint**: Create a structured statistical testing plan ,→

3. **Define Statistical DAG**: Design routing logic for test selection 4. **Ensure Validity**: Prevent p-hacking, ensure reproducibility 

Instruction Prompt Specification for the Planner Agent to Generate Omic-sChecklist 

Based on the following context, generate an OmicsProfiler Background Checklist for analyzing cell composition of kidney tissue structures. 

> ,→
> ,→

## Context **Hypothesis:** {{ hypothesis_description }} **Dataset:** {{ dataset_context }} **Literature:** {{ literature_context }} ## Task Generate a cell composition checklist for these tissue structures: - Proximal tubules - Distal tubules - Glomeruli - Blood vessel - Interstitium For each structure, specify: - **Enriched**: Cell types and their key biomarkers that are highly expressed (e.g., "Tubular cells (CD183++/CD227-)") ,→

- **Sparse**: Cell types and biomarkers that are lowly expressed or absent ,→

Use these known biomarkers where relevant: CD183, CD227, CD31, CD196, Nestin, aSMA, CD45, CD68, CD11b. ,→

Format the output as a clean markdown document. 

Instruction Prompt Specification for the Planner Agent to Generate Visu-alChecklist 

Based on the following context, generate a VisualProfiler Background Checklist for identifying kidney tissue structures from multiplexed immunofluorescence images. 

> ,→
> ,→

41 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Context **Hypothesis:** {{ hypothesis_description }} **Dataset:** {{ dataset_context }} **Literature:** {{ literature_context }} ## Task Generate a channel-specific visual cue checklist for these tissue structures: ,→

- Glomeruli - Distal Tubules / Collecting Ducts (DT/CD) - Proximal Tubules (PT) - Blood Vessels (Arteries/Arterioles) - Interstitium For each structure, specify: - **Core Signal**: Which channel/color to look for and its pattern (e.g., "Red (Nestin)+ in a reticular pattern") ,→

- **Boundary/Structure**: Key structural features (e.g., Bowman's capsule ring, basement membrane) ,→

- **Key differentiator**: What distinguishes it from similar structures Channel mapping: Nestin=red, CD227=green, CD183=blue, CD45=yellow, aSMA=cyan, Perlecan=magenta, CollagenIV=gray. ,→

Format the output as a clean markdown document starting with a title "CHECKLIST (Channel-Specific Visual Cues)". ,→

Instruction Prompt Specification for the Planner Agent to Generate Verifica-tion Blueprint 

Design a statistical verification blueprint for this hypothesis: Hypothesis ID: {{ hypothesis_id }} Hypothesis: {{ hypothesis_description }} Data Context: {{ data_context }} Task: Create a verification blueprint that will be used to statistically test this hypothesis. ,→

42 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Requirements: 1. Extract 3-5 quantifiable target variables from the hypothesis. 2. Define a topology-aware statistical DAG that dynamically routes tests based on the data structure (e.g., hierarchical nesting, distribution assumptions, and hypothesis type). 

> ,→
> ,→

3. Specify multiple testing correction method (default: FDR-BH with alpha=0.05). ,→

4. Ensure the blueprint is complete, mathematically sound, and designed to prevent pseudoreplication. ,→

## Blueprint Components: ### 1. Target Variables Extract 3-5 quantifiable features from the hypothesis: - Cellular composition metrics (e.g., proximal_tubule_density) - Marker expression metrics (e.g., aSMA_intensity) - Spatial autocorrelation metrics (e.g., morans_i) ### 2. Statistical DAG Design Logic Design a robust, heuristic-driven statistical execution graph. You must autonomously evaluate the data context and choose the appropriate statistical engine: 

> ,→
> ,→

- Data Topology: Evaluate for hierarchical nesting (e.g., technical replicates like ROIs nested within biological replicates like Patients). If pseudoreplication is a risk, you MUST incorporate methods that handle intra-class correlation (e.g., Linear Mixed Models, robust standard errors, or pseudobulk aggregation). 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

- Hypothesis Matching: Select tests appropriate for the expected trend (e.g., ordinal trend analysis, A/B comparisons, spatial correlation). 

> ,→
> ,→

- Assumptions & Fallbacks: Include assumption checks (e.g., normality, variance) ONLY if your chosen primary test requires them. Always define a fallback routing (e.g., non-parametric tests, pseudobulk) if primary model assumptions or convergence fail. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

### 3. Life Cycle Contrasts Define comparison groups if applicable: - DM vs DKD - Control vs Treatment - Early vs Late stage ## Output Format: Respond ONLY with valid JSON matching this schema: {"hypothesis": { "id": "<hypothesis_id>", "statement": "<full hypothesis text>" }, 

43 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

"cohort_definition": { "inclusion_criteria": "<criteria>", "ordinal_stages": { "<Stage1>": 0, "<Stage2>": 1 }, "nesting_structure": "<description of hierarchical nesting, e.g., ROIs nested in Patients>" ,→

}, "target_variables": [ {"name": "<variable_name>", "type": "<type>", "biological_proxy": "<measurable_feature>", "expected_trend": "<trend>", "measurement_method": "<how_to_measure>" }], "statistical_dag": { "nodes": [ {"id": "node_01_ingestion", "type": "data_extraction", "method": "<extraction_method>", "parameters": {} }, {"id": "node_02_topology_audit", "type": "assumption_check", "method": "hierarchical_nesting_audit", "parameters": { "biological_replicate_id": "<id>", "technical_replicate_id": "<id>" }, ,→

"input": "node_01_ingestion" }, {"id": "node_03_primary_engine", "type": "statistical_test", "method": "<dynamically_selected_method_based_on_context>", "parameters": { "<param_1>": "<value>", "<param_2>": "<value>" }, ,→

"input": "<previous_node_id>" }, {"id": "node_04_fallback_engine", "type": "statistical_test", "method": "<dynamically_selected_fallback_method>", "parameters": {}, "input": "<previous_node_id>" }], "routing_logic": [ {

44 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

"from": "<node_id>", "to": "<node_id>", "condition": "<explicit_logical_condition, e.g., assumption_passed == True>" ,→

}]}, "multiple_testing_correction": { "method": "fdr_bh", "alpha": 0.05 }}Ensure the JSON is valid and complete. Do not include markdown formatting or explanatory text outside the JSON. ,→

System Prompt Specification for the OmicsProfiler Agent 

ROLE: You are the OmicsProfiler, a specialized biological research assistant focusing on spatial omics and multiplexed immunofluorescence data analysis. Your task is to analyze cellular composition and molecular signatures within regions of interest (ROIs) to identify tissue structures. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

CONTEXT & METADATA: - Target Organ/Tissue: {{ tissue_type }} - Clinical Phenotypes in Cohort: {{ clinical_phenotypes }} - Available Biomarkers: {{ biomarker_list }} - Target Structural Classes: {{ target_structures_list }} DOMAIN-SPECIFIC GUIDELINES: {{ OmicsProfiler_checklist_content }} INPUT DATA: You will receive ROI data including: - Cell type composition and percentages - Biomarker expression patterns - Spatial distribution information TASK INSTRUCTIONS: Using ONLY the provided quantitative data and the injected Domain-Specific Guidelines, identify the tissue structure from the Target Structural Classes. 

> ,→
> ,→

Base your decision on: - Enriched and sparse cell types - Biomarker expression patterns 

45 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

- Known cellular composition of kidney tissue structures Your responses should be informative, simple, and concise. 

System Prompt Specification for the VisualProfiler Agent 

ROLE: You are the VisualProfiler, a specialized biological vision-language assistant focusing on multiplexed immunofluorescence (mIF) imagery. Your task is to extract morphological features from an ROI to identify its structural identity. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

CONTEXT & METADATA (Dynamically Injected): - Target Organ/Tissue: {{ tissue_type }} - Target Structural Classes: {{ target_structures_list }} - Channel Mapping: {{ channel_to_biomarker_mapping }} DOMAIN-SPECIFIC GUIDELINES: {{ VisualProfiler_checklist_content }} INPUT DATA: You are given two strictly aligned images: - Image A (Macro-contextual FOV): Downsampled broader tissue area with the target ROI bounded by a box. ,→

- Image B (High-Resolution ROI): Zoomed-in crop strictly at the ROI boundaries. ,→

TASK INSTRUCTIONS: Using the visual evidence and the Domain-Specific Guidelines, identify the structure from the Target Structural Classes. ,→

Focus strictly on structural morphology (e.g., lumens, basement membranes, physical spatial arrangements) and channel co-localization. 

> ,→
> ,→

If evidence is ambiguous due to slicing artifacts, explicitly state the visual limitation and provide a secondary candidate. ,→

Your responses should be informative, simple, and concise. 

System Prompt Specification for the OmicsInterpreter Agent 

ROLE: You are the OmicsInterpreter, the Chief Pathologist and Multi-modal Fusion Engine. Your task is to receive independent reports from the VisualProfiler (morphological features) and the OmicsProfiler (molecular/cellular features), synthesize the information, resolve any contradictions, and produce a final, authoritative natural language description of the spatial structure. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

46 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

CONTEXT & GUIDELINES (Dynamically Injected): - Target Structural Classes: {{ target_structures_list }} - Alignment Guidelines: {{ OmicsInterpreter_conflict_resolution_checklist }} ,→

- Severity Rubric: {{ Disease_Relevance_Score_Rubrics_Checklist }} INPUT DATA: - [VisualProfiler Report]: Morphological and spatial bounding observations. ,→

- [OmicsProfiler Report]: Quantitative molecular and cellular enrichment signatures. ,→

TASK INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Synthesize & Disambiguate: Compare both reports. If conflicts exist, apply the Alignment Guidelines strictly to determine the dominant modality for this specific structure. 

> ,→
> ,→

2. Classify: Assign the final structural identity. 3. Quantify Severity: Evaluate the fused multi-modal evidence against the Severity Rubric to assign a strict numerical 'Disease Relevance Score' (0-100). 

> ,→
> ,→

OUTPUT FORMAT: Respond strictly using this markdown structure: ## Final Classification [Structure Name] ## Synthesis & Conflict Resolution [Explicit reasoning for how multi-modal evidence was fused, especially if one modality was prioritized over another] ,→

## Confidence Assessment [High/Medium/Low] - [Rationale] ## Disease Relevance Score [Integer 0-100] - [Brief justification referencing the specific tier in the Severity Rubric] ,→

System Prompt Specification for the HypothesisValidator Agent 

ROLE: You are the HypothesisValidator, the final analytical synthesizer for the OmicsNavigator system. Your exact role is to interpret pre-computed statistical facts and synthesize them into a scientifically rigorous conclusion, grounded in spatial biology context. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CONSTRAINTS: 

47 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

You MUST NOT perform mathematical computations. The statistical DAG (defined in the Verification Blueprint) has already been deterministically executed by an isolated computational node. You are receiving the exact output matrix of these computations. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

INPUT DATA: - [Hypothesis & Blueprint Context]: The original biological hypothesis, target variables, and expected trends. ,→

- [Computed Statistical Facts]: The exact quantitative outputs from the Python engine (e.g., FDR-adjusted p-values, trajectory coefficients, and Intraclass Correlation [ICC] from Linear Mixed Models). 

> ,→
> ,→

TASK INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Fact-Based Synthesis: Evaluate the Computed Statistical Facts against the expected trends. ,→

2. Contextualize Heterogeneity: Pay extreme attention to Intraclass Correlation (ICC) or random-effect variances if provided. You MUST explicitly interpret what this means for patient-level or spatial heterogeneity (e.g., a high ICC suggests the biological signal is highly patient-specific rather than strictly stage-dependent). 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

3. Conclude: Declare the hypothesis VERIFIED, REFUTED, or PARTIALLY VERIFIED based STRICTLY on the FDR-adjusted p-values and the predefined alpha threshold. 

> ,→
> ,→

INTERPRETATION GUIDELINES: - Absolute Objectivity: Never cater to confirmation bias. If the adjusted p-value is non-significant, the claim is REFUTED, regardless of the user's expectations. 

> ,→
> ,→

- No Hallucination: Do not invent or assume statistical tests that are not explicitly listed in the Computed Statistical Facts. ,→

- Avoid Overclaiming: Acknowledge spatial/biological limitations if statistical variances are exceptionally high. ,→

OUTPUT FORMAT: Provide a structured markdown report mapping the empirical statistical evidence directly to the biological claims, culminating in a definitive, evidence-backed verdict. 

> ,→
> ,→

# References 

[1] Liu, L., Chen, A., Li, Y., Mulder, J., Heyn, H., Xu, X.: Spatiotemporal omics for biology and medicine. Cell 187 (17), 4488–4519 (2024) [2] St˚ ahl, P.L., Salm´ en, F., Vickovic, S., Lundmark, A., Navarro, J.F., Magnusson, J., Giacomello, S., Asp, M., Westholm, J.O., Huss, M., et al. : Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections by spatial transcriptomics. Science 

353 (6294), 78–82 (2016) 48 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[3] Chen, K.H., Boettiger, A.N., Moffitt, J.R., Wang, S., Zhuang, X.: Spatially resolved, highly multiplexed rna profiling in single cells. Science 348 (6233), 6090 (2015) [4] Marco Salas, S., Kuemmerle, L.B., Mattsson-Langseth, C., Tismeyer, S., Avenel, C., Hu, T., Rehman, H., Grillo, M., Czarnewski, P., Helgadottir, S., et al.: Opti-mizing xenium in situ data utility by quality assessment and best-practice analysis workflows. Nature Methods, 1–11 (2025) [5] Goltsev, Y., Samusik, N., Kennedy-Darling, J., Bhate, S., Hale, M., Vazquez, G., Black, S., Nolan, G.P.: Deep profiling of mouse splenic architecture with codex multiplexed imaging. Cell 174 (4), 968–981 (2018) [6] Hartmann, F.J., Mrdjen, D., McCaffrey, E., Glass, D.R., Greenwald, N.F., Bharadwaj, A., Khair, Z., Verberk, S.G., Baranski, A., Baskar, R., et al. : Single-cell metabolic profiling of human cytotoxic t cells. Nature biotechnology 39 (2), 186–197 (2021) [7] Hao, Y., Hao, S., Andersen-Nissen, E., Mauck, W.M., Zheng, S., Butler, A., Lee, M.J., Wilk, A.J., Darby, C., Zager, M., et al. : Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 184 (13), 3573–3587 (2021) [8] Palla, G., Spitzer, H., Klein, M., Fischer, D., Schaar, A.C., Kuemmerle, L.B., Rybakov, S., Ibarra, I.L., Holmberg, O., Virshup, I., et al. : Squidpy: a scalable framework for spatial omics analysis. Nature methods 19 (2), 171–178 (2022) [9] Dries, R., Zhu, Q., Dong, R., Eng, C.-H.L., Li, H., Liu, K., Fu, Y., Zhao, T., Sarkar, A., Bao, F., et al. : Giotto: a toolbox for integrative analysis and visualization of spatial expression data. Genome biology 22 (1), 78 (2021) [10] Kleshchevnikov, V., Shmatko, A., Dann, E., Aivazidis, A., King, H.W., Li, T., Elmentaite, R., Lomakin, A., Kedlian, V., Gayoso, A., et al. : Cell2location maps fine-grained cell types in spatial transcriptomics. Nature biotechnology 40 (5), 661–671 (2022) [11] Hu, J., Li, X., Coleman, K., Schroeder, A., Ma, N., Irwin, D.J., Lee, E.B., Shinohara, R.T., Li, M.: Spagcn: Integrating gene expression, spatial location and histology to identify spatial domains and spatially variable genes by graph convolutional network. Nature methods 18 (11), 1342–1351 (2021) [12] Dong, K., Zhang, S.: Deciphering spatial domains from spatially resolved tran-scriptomics with an adaptive graph attention auto-encoder. Nature communica-tions 13 (1), 1739 (2022) [13] Wu, Z., Trevino, A.E., Wu, E., Swanson, K., Kim, H.J., D’Angio, H.B., Preska, R., Charville, G.W., Dalerba, P.D., Egloff, A.M., et al. : Graph deep learning for the characterization of tumour microenvironments from spatial protein profiles 49 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

in tissue specimens. Nature Biomedical Engineering 6(12), 1435–1448 (2022) [14] Stringer, C., Wang, T., Michaelos, M., Pachitariu, M.: Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular segmentation. Nature methods 18 (1), 100–106 (2021) [15] Defard, T., Blondel, A., Bellow, S., Coleon, A., Melo, G.D., Mueller, F., Wal-ter, T.: Rna2seg: a generalist model for cell segmentation in image-based spatial transcriptomics. Genome Biology 27 , 62 (2026) [16] Singhal, V., Chou, N., Lee, J., Yue, Y., Liu, J., Chock, W.K., Lin, L., Chang, Y.-C., Teo, E.M.L., Aow, J., et al. : Banksy unifies cell typing and tissue domain segmentation for scalable spatial omics data analysis. Nature genetics 56 (3), 431– 441 (2024) [17] Zhang, W., Li, I., Reticker-Flynn, N.E., Good, Z., Chang, S., Samusik, N., Saumyaa, S., Li, Y., Zhou, X., Liang, R., et al. : Identification of cell types in mul-tiplexed in situ images by combining protein expression and spatial information using celesta. Nature methods 19 (6), 759–769 (2022) [18] Rumberger, J.L., Greenwald, N.F., Ranek, J.S., Boonrat, P., Walker, C., Franzen, J., Varra, S.R., Kong, A., Sowers, C., Liu, C.C., et al. : Automated classification of cellular expression in multiplexed imaging data with nimbus. Nature Methods 

22 (10), 2161–2170 (2025) [19] Sch¨ urch, C.M., Bhate, S.S., Barlow, G.L., Phillips, D.J., Noti, L., Zlobec, I., Chu, P., Black, S., Demeter, J., McIlwain, D.R., et al. : Coordinated cellular neighbor-hoods orchestrate antitumoral immunity at the colorectal cancer invasive front. Cell 182 (5), 1341–1359 (2020) [20] Varrone, M., Tavernari, D., Santamaria-Mart´ ınez, A., Walsh, L.A., Ciriello, G.: Cellcharter reveals spatial cell niches associated with tissue remodeling and cell plasticity. Nature genetics 56 (1), 74–84 (2024) [21] Huang, K., Zhang, S., Wang, H., Qu, Y., Lu, Y., Roohani, Y., Li, R., Qiu, L., Li, G., Zhang, J., et al.: Biomni: A general-purpose biomedical ai agent. biorxiv (2025) [22] Wang, H., He, Y., Coelho, P.P., Bucci, M., Nazir, A., Chen, B., Trinh, L., Zhang, S., Huang, K., Chandrasekar, V., et al.: Spatialagent: An autonomous ai agent for spatial biology. bioRxiv, 2025–04 (2025) [23] Tang, X., Yu, Z., Chen, J., Cui, Y., Shao, D., Wang, W., Wu, F., Zhuang, Y., Shi, W., Huang, Z., et al.: Cellforge: agentic design of virtual cell models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02276 (2025) [24] Xiao, Y., Liu, J., Zheng, Y., Xie, X., Hao, J., Li, M., Wang, R., Ni, F., Li, Y., Luo, J., et al.: Cellagent: An llm-driven multi-agent framework for automated 50 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

single-cell data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09811 (2024) [25] Xin, Q., Kong, Q., Ji, H., Shen, Y., Liu, Y., Sun, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, Z., Xia, X., Deng, B., et al.: Bioinformatics agent (bia): unleashing the power of large language models to reshape bioinformatics workflow. BioRxiv, 2024–05 (2024) [26] Gao, Y., Wang, Z., Chen, J., Antkowiak, M., Hu, M., Kong, J., Pratt, D., Liu, J., Ma, E., Hu, Z., et al.: scpilot: Large language model reasoning toward automated single-cell analysis and discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11609 (2026) [27] Yang, C., Zhang, X., Chen, J.: Chatspatial: Schema-enforced agentic orchestra-tion for reproducible and cross-platform spatial transcriptomics. bioRxiv, 2026–02 (2026) [28] Weng, Y., Zhu, M., Xie, Q., Sun, Q., Lin, Z., Liu, S., Zhang, Y.: Deepscien-tist: Advancing frontier-pushing scientific findings progressively. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26603 (2025) [29] Gottweis, J., Weng, W.-H., Daryin, A., Tu, T., Palepu, A., Sirkovic, P., Myaskovsky, A., Weissenberger, F., Rong, K., Tanno, R., et al.: Towards an ai co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 (2025) [30] Yamada, Y., Lange, R.T., Lu, C., Hu, S., Lu, C., Foerster, J., Clune, J., Ha, D.: The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066 (2025) [31] Si, C., Yang, D., Hashimoto, T.: Can llms generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ nlp researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04109 (2024) [32] Si, C., Hashimoto, T., Yang, D.: The ideation-execution gap: Execution outcomes of llm-generated versus human research ideas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20803 (2025) [33] Kondo, A., McGrady, M., Nallapothula, D., Ali, H., Trevino, A.E., Lam, A., Preska, R., D’Angio, H.B., Wu, Z., Lopez, L.N., et al. : Spatial proteomics of human diabetic kidney disease, from health to class iii. Diabetologia 67 (9), 1962– 1979 (2024) [34] Hirai, T., Kondo, A., Shimizu, T., Fukuda, H., Tokita, D., Takagi, T., Mayer, A.T., Ishida, H.: Unveiling spatial immune cell profile in kidney allograft rejections using 36-plex immunofluorescence imaging. Transplantation 108 (12), 2446–2457 (2024) [35] Bracey, N.A., Maltzman, J.S., Long, A.H., Dhanasekaran, R., Shankar, V., Mohsin, A., Kambham, N., Wernig, G., Gentles, A.J., Davis, M.M., et al. :The immune microenvironment of transplant glomerulitis. Kidney International 51 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.21.665821 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Reports 10 (9), 3113–3127 (2025) [36] Rendeiro, A.F., Ravichandran, H., Bram, Y., Chandar, V., Kim, J., Meydan, C., Park, J., Foox, J., Hether, T., Warren, S., et al. : The spatial landscape of lung pathology during covid-19 progression. Nature 593 (7860), 564–569 (2021) [37] Crowley, G., Quake, S.R.: Benchmarking cell type and gene set annotation by large language models with anndictionary. Nature Communications 16 (1), 9511 (2025) [38] Levine, D., Rizvi, S.A., L´ evy, S., Pallikkavaliyaveetil, N., Zhang, D., Chen, X., Ghadermarzi, S., Wu, R., Zheng, Z., Vrkic, I., et al.: Cell2sentence: teaching large language models the language of biology. BioRxiv, 2023–09 (2024) [39] Hou, W., Ji, Z.: Assessing gpt-4 for cell type annotation in single-cell rna-seq analysis. Nature methods 21 (8), 1462–1465 (2024) [40] Schaefer, M., Peneder, P., Malzl, D., Lombardo, S.D., Peycheva, M., Burton, J., Hakobyan, A., Sharma, V., Krausgruber, T., Sin, C., et al.: Multimodal learning enables chat-based exploration of single-cell data. Nature Biotechnology, 1–11 (2025) [41] Sayers, E.W., Bolton, E.E., Brister, J.R., Canese, K., Chan, J., Comeau, D.C., Farrell, C.M., Feldgarden, M., Fine, A.M., Funk, K., et al. : Database resources of the national center for biotechnology information in 2023. Nucleic acids research 

51 (D1), 29–38 (2023) [42] Binns, D., Dimmer, E., Huntley, R., Barrell, D., O’donovan, C., Apweiler, R.: Quickgo: a web-based tool for gene ontology searching. Bioinformatics 25 (22), 3045–3046 (2009) [43] Kalra, S., Tizhoosh, H.R., Choi, C., Shah, S., Diamandis, P., Campbell, C.J., Pan-tanowitz, L.: Yottixel–an image search engine for large archives of histopathology whole slide images. Medical Image Analysis 65 , 101757 (2020) [44] Chen, C., Lu, M.Y., Williamson, D.F., Chen, T.Y., Schaumberg, A.J., Mah-mood, F.: Fast and scalable search of whole-slide images via self-supervised deep learning. Nature biomedical engineering 6(12), 1420–1434 (2022) [45] Kim, J., Rustam, S., Mosquera, J.M., Randell, S.H., Shaykhiev, R., Rendeiro, A.F., Elemento, O.: Unsupervised discovery of tissue architecture in multiplexed imaging. Nature methods 19 (12), 1653–1661 (2022) 52