Title: RAFT: A Stateful Retrieval-Augmented Framework for Troubleshooting Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.20754v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 01:42:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# RAFT: A Stateful Retrieval-Augmented Framework for Troubleshooting Agents *

Mingxuan Zhang, Xiaowen Wang, Anupma Sharan, Zhengyi Chen, Chenyu Diana Zhang , Shanshan Yang , Chittibabu Pacharu 

Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA  

> Correspondence: mingxzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract 

Effective troubleshooting agents in enterprise customer support depend on retrieving action-able guidance from similar historical cases, yet existing retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems treat support cases as static docu-ments and overlook their multi-stage, state-ful nature. We introduce RAFT (Retrieval-Augmented Framework for Troubleshooting Agents), a stateful RAG framework that ab-stracts each closed historical case into a di-rected chain of timeline entries and retrieves at the entry level, surfacing cases whose in-termediate states match the active case and returning the parent-case trajectory anchored at the matched state; an optional case-level graph links cases through a configurable simi-larity representation. We evaluate this retrieval layer directly, which, unlike evaluating a full agent system, requires no production deploy-ment. Because public multi-stage troubleshoot-ing data is extremely rare, we pair a synthetic benchmark built from Microsoft Learn Win-dows Server documentation with real Apache Jira issues carrying human-created duplicate labels. RAFT improves Case Hit over vanilla RAG and GraphRAG baselines at every stage of case progress, with statistically significant gains over the strongest baseline; the Jira re-sults provide directional evidence that the ad-vantage transfers to real case histories. We release our benchmark, implementation, and the Apache Jira evaluation set. 1

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) now power intelli-gent agents across domains from software engineer-ing (Jimenez et al., 2023) to customer support (Xu et al., 2024). In enterprise customer support, an effective agent must reason over a private corpus of closed historical cases, whether it resolves incom-ing tickets or assists support engineers in doing so. 

> *Accepted to EMNLP 2026 (Industry Track)
> 1https://github.com/microsoft/RAFT

Fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022) can inject such domain knowledge, but it is com-putationally expensive, restricted to open-weight models, prone to catastrophic forgetting (Luo et al., 2023), and requires periodic retraining as new and more recent cases emerge. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2025) is a more practical alter-native, grounding the LLM in a private knowledge base at inference time without altering its param-eters. Yet as knowledge bases grow in scale and complexity, traditional RAG struggles: retrieved context is often extensive, poorly organized, and noisy, degrading both retrieval accuracy and the agent’s ability to reason over it (Han et al., 2025b; Edge et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024). GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b; Zhuang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2026) responds by imposing explicit relational structure over the knowledge base. How-ever, these general-purpose pipelines are not de-signed for troubleshooting histories, where inves-tigations unfold across heterogeneous, noisy arti-facts and closed cases vary in the actionable guid-ance they provide. Effective retrieval must iden-tify relevant investigation states, preserve coher-ent case trajectories, distinguish useful evidence from non-actionable records, and protect sensi-tive information (Section 3). By contrast, entity-centric GraphRAG approaches build graphs of LLM-extracted entities and relations offline and use them to guide retrieval, without explicitly repre-senting the progression of individual investigations. This adds graph-construction cost and couples re-trieval to an entity-centric representation that can be harder to adapt as models and agent harnesses evolve (Zhuang et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). We propose RAFT (Retrieval-Augmented Framework for Troubleshooting Agents), a stateful arXiv:2609.20754v1 [cs.AI] 17 Sep 2026 RAG framework built around the multi-stage nature of troubleshooting. RAFT abstracts each closed historical case into a directed chain of timeline entries, each recording the technical state at one meaningful stage of the investigation. Embedding and retrieving at the entry level rather than the case level surfaces cases whose intermediate states most closely match the active case, giving the agent both tactical guidance for the current stage and strategic context on where comparable cases led. A complementary, optional case-level graph links cases through a configurable similarity representation, enabling expansion to relevant cases that do not match at the entry level. To assess whether this representation supplies useful evidence throughout an investigation, we evaluate the retrieval layer independently of a com-plete troubleshooting agent. Realistic end-to-end evaluation often depends on access to operational environments and production workflows, making reproducible academic evaluation, cross-system comparison, and extension by others difficult. The retrieval layer, however, is independently testable across agent harnesses, underlying models, and workflows. We therefore measure whether, given the current information in an active case, RAFT sur-faces similar historical cases that provide concrete evidence for diagnosis and resolution. This evaluation requires multi-stage trou-bleshooting histories and labels identifying similar cases, but suitable public data is extremely rare (Section 2). We evaluate on two complementary datasets: a synthetic benchmark constructed from Microsoft Learn Windows Server troubleshoot-ing documentation (MicrosoftDocs, 2024) for con-trolled demonstration and development, and real Apache Jira (Apache Software Foundation, 2026) issues with human-created duplicate labels to check that the advantage transfers to real data. RAFT im-proves Case Hit over vanilla RAG and GraphRAG baselines at every stage of case progress (Sec-tions 5.4 and 5.5). 

Contributions. 

• A stateful RAG architecture that represents closed historical cases as directed chains of timeline entries, retrieves over their evolving intermediate troubleshooting states, and re-turns the parent-case trajectory anchored at the matched state. • A case-level graph linking cases through con-figurable case attributes, enabling principled expansion beyond initial entry-level matches. • A public synthetic development benchmark 

of 826 support cases from Microsoft Learn Windows Server documentation, with a repro-ducible protocol that probes retrieval at multi-ple stages of an active case. 

2 Related Work 

For broad surveys of RAG, Agentic RAG, and GraphRAG, we refer readers to Fan et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2025b); Singh et al. (2025). These pipelines target generic document corpora, and ap-plying them to historical customer support cases remains underexplored, largely due to the lack of suitable public datasets. To our knowledge, no public customer support dataset (Abdellatif, 2025; Qu et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018) satisfies all of the following criteria: (1) rich, multi-turn interac-tions rather than single-turn question answering; (2) key entities (error codes, products, services) preserved without redaction; and (3) labels group-ing similar cases together. Beyond the data gap, most work in this area originates in industry set-tings where evaluation relies on proprietary data and production metrics, severely limiting repro-ducibility. Existing academic work also focuses largely on question answering over static domain documents (Su et al., 2025; Patel, 2025; Zhao et al., 2025) rather than leveraging historical case inter-actions for multi-stage troubleshooting. The clos-est work to ours, Xu et al. (2024), constructs a knowledge graph from historical cases for ques-tion answering and shows that graph structure can benefit support retrieval; however, their system is closed-source, their dataset private, and their evalu-ation confined to a production environment, mak-ing direct comparison infeasible. Evaluating the retrieval layer directly removes this dependence on production deployments and lets others reproduce and extend the comparison. We therefore pair a public synthetic benchmark for controlled demon-stration and development with a transfer evalua-tion on Apache Jira (Apache Software Foundation, 2026), alongside an open implementation and a reproducible protocol. 

3 Problem Statement 

In enterprise customer support, particularly for IT services, resolving a ticket is rarely a one-shot pro-cess. Resolution unfolds across multiple stages: an initial symptom report, hypothesis formation and iterative information gathering across logs, system outputs, and diagnostic tools, and finally identify-ing the root cause and issuing targeted remediation. Across this trajectory, surfacing similar previously resolved cases and learning how they were diag-nosed and fixed is critical for an agent to resolve the active case effectively. We therefore seek a retrieval system, built on a corpus of closed historical cases, that identifies similar cases given a query reflecting the current state of an active case and surfaces guidance on both the immediate next step and the broader reso-lution trajectory. Critically, retrieval must be state-aware : rather than treating the active case as a static lookup, the agent issues a sequence of up-dated queries as the active case evolves, and the system must return the most pertinent cases at each stage. Early on, a ticket describes only surface symptoms (an error code or a brief account of the behavior), and the agent should retrieve cases with similar initial symptoms to identify productive directions; as more context is gathered, updated queries let the system surface cases whose inter-mediate states match the current investigative state, giving finer-grained insight into the next steps. We deliberately scope this retrieval problem to surfacing similar cases and the evidence needed to diagnose and act on them. Higher-order reasoning, over how cases relate or how root causes cluster, is valuable but is best performed by the agent online against the specific active case rather than frozen into the offline index. We therefore keep retrieval focused on this task and defer relational inference to the agent, a stance our metrics (Section 5) reflect. This problem exposes four fundamental limita-tions of existing RAG approaches: 1. Noisy, unstructured data. Raw case data in-terleaves substantial non-technical content with the diagnostically relevant details, and the sig-nal is scattered across many turns. Because existing RAG baselines operate directly on this raw data, the noise degrades their ability to identify genuinely similar cases in the first place. 2. Incoherent retrieved chunks. Even when a similar case is retrieved, an agent cannot rea-son effectively from isolated chunks. To judge whether a historical case is truly similar and to learn from how it was resolved, the agent must see the case as a coherent whole, which requires reassembling the raw case data by map-ping retrieved chunks back to their parent cases. Given the size of real cases and the practical output-token limits of RAG tools, this both wastes tokens and sharply limits the number of similar cases an agent can examine per re-trieval. GraphRAG methods that return chunks together with their entity relationships partially mitigate this, but the construction process is un-stable and offers no guarantee that the chunks needed to form a coherent picture are retained (Zhuang et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025a; Zhou et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025). 3. Non-actionable cases. Closed tickets do not uniformly contain useful diagnostic or reme-diation evidence. Some end because the cus-tomer becomes unresponsive or the ticket is administratively closed, without documenting a meaningful investigation or outcome. A re-trieval system must distinguish such records from cases that can inform the active inves-tigation, rather than treating closure itself as evidence of usefulness. 4. Privacy constraints. Enterprise customer data often contains personally identifiable informa-tion that should not be exposed directly to re-trieval or to the agent, requiring an additional processing layer to abstract or redact such con-tent before indexing. RAFT addresses these limitations through the two-level architecture described next. 

4 RAFT 

RAFT organizes closed historical cases at two lev-els: a per-case extracted resolution trajectory and a case-level graph G that links cases through a con-figurable similarity representation. 

4.1 Indexing 

Let H = {hi}Ni=1 be a corpus of N closed histori-cal cases. Each raw case hi has a unique identifier 

ui (e.g., ticket number), metadata mi (e.g., cate-gory, created and closed times), and a time-ordered turn sequence (x(i)1 , . . . , x (i) 

> Ti

) of emails, notes, logs, and similar artifacts. We process each case inde-pendently to obtain a structured representation ˜hi:

hi −→ ˜hi def 

=  ρi, {ϕ(i) 

> k

}Ki

> k=1

, r i, a i, e i

, (1) where ρi is the reviewer assessment, {ϕ(i) 

> k

}Ki 

> k=1

the chronological timeline, ri the root cause when es-Stateful Case Indexing (Offline) State-Aware Retrieval (Online)         

> Historical Cases Extraction workflow Actionability flag
> Non-actionable (excluded)
> Structured Case Representation
> Timeline entries - directed chain, one per meaningful state transition
> State 1 State 2 State 3 ... State k
> e.g. symptom - hypothesis - root cause - resolution
> Root cause Resolution steps Entities Metadata
> every entry embedded -> entry-level index
> entry-level index link by shared root cause / resolution
> Case-Level Graph G = (V, E)
> Edge: RRF (semantic + BM25) over root cause + resolution top-k neighbors, symmetrized Timeline entry Case Entities Excluded
> Active Case - each query reflects a new state
> q1 q2 q3
> state 1 state 2 state 3
> ...
> query q re-query against updated state
> Hybrid scoring over all timeline entries (semantic + BM25 via RRF) Greedy promotion to parent cases (top-n distinct cases) Seed cases + matched anchor entry Troubleshooting Agent stage-specific + trajectory-aware guidance
> agent decides whether to expand
> Graph expansion via G (optional) neighbors sharing root cause / resolution
> case graph G

Figure 1: Overview of RAFT : workflow-based case extraction and entry-level retrieval with optional graph expansion. The actionability flag illustrates reviewer-based filtering; the feedback arrow denotes re-querying by the external troubleshooting agent. 

tablished, ai the documented resolution or mitiga-tion steps, and ei the troubleshooting-relevant enti-ties. To construct this representation, workers pro-cess the ordered artifacts in bounded batches, car-rying the evolving case state into each subsequent pass. Each worker receives the next batch alongside the metadata and accumulated state, adding new findings or revising earlier interpretations as evi-dence develops. Source-query and domain-specific tools provide additional evidence when needed. Once all batches have been processed, a reviewer checks and refines the completed state, consult-ing source evidence and revision history to resolve omissions or inconsistencies, and produces ρi. This workflow accommodates histories beyond a single context window while separating incremental ex-traction from final review. Further details of the extraction workflow are provided in Appendix B.2. 

Case assessment and filtering. The application-specific assessment ρi can include case labels, ac-tionability judgments, and supporting reasoning. Filters based on the extracted state (including enti-ties ei), reviewer assessment ρi, and metadata mi

can be applied during indexing to omit cases from storage or at retrieval time to narrow the search space by error code, category, product version, timestamp, or case outcome. We denote the indices of cases retained in the search index by I.

Timeline entries. Each timeline entry ϕ(i)

k dis-tills a contiguous segment of the case history, com-prising consecutive turns  x(i)

j , x (i)

j+1 , . . . , x (i)

j+z



that together capture a meaningful stage of the in-vestigation. These semantic segments need not co-incide with the workflow’s processing-batch bound-aries. Segmentation follows a single principle: a new entry begins at each meaningful state tran-sition, where the framing of the problem or the current understanding is materially updated. These transitions correspond to the natural phases of an investigation, for example the opening symptom report, a hypothesis being added, discarded, or con-firmed, the root cause being confirmed, and a reso-lution being proposed and verified. Acknowledg-ments and minor updates that add no new insight are absorbed into the current entry. This keeps the timeline compact ( Ki ≪ Ti) while ensuring every entry carries actionable information. Each entry records the technical state of its segment: the ac-tions taken, the hypotheses under investigation, and the current understanding of the issue. 

Case-level graph. Optionally, we construct an undirected graph G = ( V, E) over stored cases, with vertex set V = {˜hi : i ∈ I} . The text used to link cases is configurable: root cause, issue summary, or another deployment-specific field can be used alone or in combination. In our experi-ments, we concatenate root-cause and resolution texts and score every pair of cases using a hybrid of semantic similarity and BM25 lexical similar-ity (Lù, 2024), combined through Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) (Cormack et al., 2009). We con-nect each case to its top-k highest-scoring neigh-Algorithm 1 RAFT Entry-Level Retrieval                                                                     

> Require: Query q, indexed timeline entries {ϕ(i)
> k}, number of cases n, context budget B, optional case filter F
> Ensure: Retrieval result R
> 1: If Fis supplied, retain only entries whose parent cases satisfy F
> 2: Compute hybrid score s(q, ϕ (i)
> k)for the remaining entries 3: Sort entries in descending order of s
> 4: Initialize C← ∅ ,k∗← {} ,b←0
> 5: for each entry ϕ(i)
> kin sorted order do
> 6: if parent case i / ∈Cthen
> 7: if b+ size( ˜hi)> B then
> 8: break
> 9: end if
> 10: C←C∪ { i};k∗
> i←k
> 11: b←b+ size( ˜hi)
> 12: end if
> 13: if |C|=nthen
> 14: break
> 15: end if
> 16: end for
> 17: return R={(˜hc, k ∗
> c) : c∈C}

bors, symmetrize the result to obtain E, and as-sign shared-nearest-neighbor (SNN) weights to the edges. Filters over metadata, entities, and reviewer assessments can further constrain the neighbor set during graph construction. The graph supports prin-cipled expansion beyond initial entry-level matches at retrieval time; outside this retrieval path, its com-munities can also support aggregate analysis of re-curring issue families, although we do not evaluate that use here. 

4.2 Retrieval 

We embed every timeline entry ϕ(i) 

> k

across all in-dexed cases ( i ∈ I ). Given a query q, we first apply any user-specified case filter, then rank entries from the remaining cases using the same hybrid score (semantic plus lexical via RRF). We greedily pro-mote ranked entries to their parent cases, selecting up to n distinct cases within a predefined context budget. The full procedure is given in Algorithm 1. For each selected case c ∈ C, k∗ 

> c

is the index of the highest-scoring timeline entry, so the agent receives both the full case representation ˜hc and the anchor entry that triggered the match. This lets the agent see which investigation state was matched, not just which case. Once the agent has identified seed cases via entry-level retrieval, the case-level graph G enables expansion to neighbors that are similar under the configured linking view but may not match at the entry level. For example, with the root-cause and resolution view used in our experiments (see Ap-                                                           

> Category Cases Messages Tokens
> Active Directory 177 11.0 ±1.8 3297 ±795 Windows Security 121 9.7 ±1.8 2556 ±628 Remote Desktop 72 10.7 ±1.9 2794 ±657 Group Policy 92 9.8 ±2.2 2948 ±642 Licensing and Activation 62 11.1 ±1.9 2550 ±496 Networking 245 10.4 ±1.7 2346 ±579 Backup and Storage 57 10.4 ±2.2 3292 ±897 Overall 826 10.4 ±1.9 2767 ±770

Table 1: Synthetic dataset statistics per category. Num-ber of Messages and Tokens report per-case mean ± std. 

pendix C.5), linked cases may share an underlying cause or remediation strategy despite exhibiting dif-ferent symptoms or intermediate states. Simply in-creasing the initial n tends to introduce noise rather than uncover these complementary cases (Zhang et al., 2025a). Graph expansion provides a targeted way to retrieve them while keeping the initial re-trieval selective. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate RAFT’s retrieval performance against vanilla RAG and GraphRAG baselines on a syn-thetic development benchmark, and then test whether the results transfer to real cases with human-created labels (Section 5.5). 

5.1 Synthetic Development Benchmark 

As discussed in Section 2, no existing public dataset meets the requirements for evaluating re-trieval in multi-stage troubleshooting. We therefore construct a synthetic corpus grounded in Microsoft Learn Windows Server troubleshooting documenta-tion (MicrosoftDocs, 2024). The synthesis pipeline first organizes source articles into a structured wiki, then generates 2–4 support cases per documented root cause, injecting context from related articles to produce realistic diagnostic ambiguity. For eval-uation, we hold out one case per root-cause group as the test query, with the remaining cases forming the indexed corpus. The synthetic data generation pipeline is detailed in Appendix A; Table 1 reports per-category statistics. 

5.2 Baselines 

We compare RAFT against vanilla RAG and two recent GraphRAG methods: HippoRAG2 (Gutiér-rez et al., 2025) and Fast-GraphRAG (Circlemind AI, 2024). HippoRAG2 builds an open-relation knowledge graph over the corpus and retrieves via personalized PageRank seeded by query-linked entities; Fast-GraphRAG extracts an entity graph and returns a budgeted mix of entities, rela-tions, and chunks. We run both in their de-fault configurations. To ensure a fair compari-son, all methods share the same embedding model (text-embedding-3-large ) and the same LLM for indexing ( gpt-5.2 ); evaluation uses gpt-5.4 .No metadata filtering is applied, isolating the effect of each method’s retrieval mechanism. Moreover, every case in our corpus is actionable, so RAFT’s actionability filtering excludes no cases and pro-vides no advantage in this comparison. In produc-tion, retrieval tools exposed to an agent typically enforce a per-call token cap on returned context. Real support cases are token-intensive, often run-ning into tens of thousands of tokens, whereas our synthetic cases are considerably shorter, averaging 2767 tokens (Table 1). To reflect this constraint, we cap retrieved context at 6000 tokens for all methods. For methods that return case-level units (RAFT, Vanilla RAG, HippoRAG2), we additionally cap re-trieval at 5 distinct cases; Fast-GraphRAG returns entity-linked chunks rather than case-level units, so only the token cap applies. Detailed configurations are provided in Appendix C.2. 

5.3 Evaluation Metrics 

A key property of troubleshooting is that useful guidance depends on how far the investigation has progressed. To capture this, we construct queries from prefixes of each test case at three progress points: 0%, 30%, and 60% of turns. The 0% query contains only the initial symptom report; later cut-offs reveal progressively more diagnostic context. We report three metrics: • Case Hit: whether at least one retrieved passage belongs to a ground-truth similar case, i.e., one sharing the same root cause and resolution. • Root Cause Coverage: the fraction of atomic claims in the gold root-cause explanation that are entailed by the retrieved context, as judged by an LLM. • Resolution Steps Coverage: the analogous frac-tion for the gold remediation procedure. Case Hit measures whether retrieval finds a matching case, while coverage measures how much of the gold diagnostic and remediation evidence the retrieved context supports. Full metric definitions appear in Appendix C.1. 

5.4 Results on the Synthetic Benchmark 

Table 2 reports retrieval performance across all methods and progress levels. RAFT achieves the best scores on every metric, with the largest and most reliable gains on Case Hit. At 0% progress (initial symptom only), RAFT achieves 84.2% Case Hit compared to 67.3% for vanilla RAG and 65.0% for HippoRAG2. This advantage persists as more context becomes available, with RAFT reaching 88.8% Case Hit at 60% progress. To statistically evaluate this claim, we compare RAFT against vanilla RAG, the strongest baseline, using boot-strap resampling clustered by root-cause group; the Case Hit gains are statistically significant at all three progress points, with full confidence intervals in Appendix C.3. Fast-GraphRAG underperforms vanilla RAG at all progress levels. This aligns with recent findings that complex entity extraction and graph-based rea-soning offer little benefit, and can even degrade retrieval, when the task does not demand hierar-chical knowledge retrieval or deep contextual rea-soning across documents (Xiang et al., 2025). In our setting, surfacing similar cases and supplying actionable insights matter more than abstract rela-tional inference. A similar pattern holds for Hip-poRAG2, which also fails to surpass vanilla RAG in this setting. To probe why entry-level retrieval helps, we ex-amine where within a matched case the hit occurs. For each test case with a correct retrieval, we record the timeline entry that triggered the match and re-port its absolute index and its depth as a percentile of the number of timeline entries in the extracted case, averaged over hits, in Table 3. The match moves steadily deeper as the query reflects a later stage, from 9.1% depth at 0% progress to 54.0% at 60%. This is the intended behavior: early queries carry only the symptom and match the opening en-tries of past cases, whereas later queries align with the corresponding intermediate states rather than re-matching symptoms. To assess robustness to noisy queries, we per-turb test queries with off-topic content, typos, and dropout, and find that RAFT degrades less than vanilla RAG (Appendix C.4). In Appendix C.6, we examine how indexing-model capacity affects RAFT’s retrieval performance through an ablation and present an agentic case study in which the agent further improves retrieval quality by composing its own queries and filtering conditions. Case Hit Root Cause Cov. Resolution Steps Cov. Method 0% 30% 60% 0% 30% 60% 0% 30% 60%                                      

> Vanilla RAG 0.673 0.719 0.769 0.597 0.625 0.672 0.528 0.548 0.590 HippoRAG2 (Gutiérrez et al., 2025) 0.650 0.688 0.711 0.574 0.609 0.637 0.507 0.541 0.559 Fast-GraphRAG (Circlemind AI, 2024) 0.421 0.442 0.583 0.294 0.299 0.448 0.208 0.213 0.341
> RAFT (Ours) 0.842 0.871 0.888 0.649 0.675 0.689 0.563 0.587 0.605

Table 2: Retrieval evaluation results averaged over 5 independent runs, reported at three progress points (0%, 30%, 60%). For each run, we randomly shuffle all cases and select one test case per root-cause group; the remaining cases form the indexed corpus. Best result per column in bold .

Case Matched-Entry Matched-Entry Progress Depth (%) Index 

0% 9.1 0.28 

30% 20.0 0.59 

60% 54.0 1.58 

Table 3: Position of the retrieval match within a case, averaged over hits. Depth = position as a percentile of the number of timeline entries in the extracted case ( 0% 

= first entry); Index = absolute position. 

Case Hit Method 0% 30% 60% 

Vanilla RAG 0.667 0.667 0.789 

RAFT (Ours) 0.833 0.840 0.895 

Table 4: Case Hit on the Apache Jira evaluation set (30 human-audited duplicate groups, 570 distractors), averaged over five runs. 

5.5 Human-Grounded Evaluation on Apache Jira 

To test whether RAFT transfers to real datasets, we build an evaluation set from public Apache Jira projects, where engineers link duplicate issues in their normal workflow (construction details in Ap-pendix D). The final evaluation set contains 30 audited duplicate groups, each evaluated against 570 additional resolved ( Fixed ) issues as distrac-tors, over contributor-written, unredacted issue his-tories. We apply RAFT as is, with no modifications to the extraction prompt, schema, models, or re-trieval procedure from the synthetic experiments, and compare against vanilla RAG, the strongest baseline in Section 5.4. RAFT improves Case Hit by +16 .7, +17 .3, and +10 .5 percentage points at the 0%, 30%, and 60% progress points (Table 4), providing directional evidence that the advantage transfers to real case histories. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented RAFT, a stateful retrieval-augmented framework that addresses the limitations of generic RAG and GraphRAG pipelines on enterprise cus-tomer support data. RAFT abstracts each closed historical case into a directed chain of timeline en-tries and optionally connects cases at the graph level through a configurable similarity represen-tation, enabling state-aware retrieval that returns coherent, stage-specific evidence. On a synthetic benchmark built from Microsoft Learn Windows Server documentation, RAFT substantially im-proves Case Hit over vanilla RAG and recent GraphRAG baselines at every progress level, and an evaluation on real Apache Jira issues provides directional evidence that the advantage transfers to real case histories. Limitations 

While our experiments demonstrate the effective-ness of RAFT for retrieval, three limitations should be noted. First, our main evaluation is conducted on a synthetic dataset of moderate scale, whereas production corpora typically contain far more cases with substantially higher token counts per case. Second, the Apache Jira evaluation comprises 30 audited duplicate groups and carries no confidence intervals, so we treat it as directional transfer evi-dence rather than a comprehensive real-world eval-uation. Third, this work does not evaluate final diagnosis, resolution success, engineer productiv-ity, or other end-to-end troubleshooting outcomes; we scope the work to the retrieval layer for the reasons given in Section 1. 

References 

Mohammad Abdellatif. 2025. Help desk tickets. Apache Software Foundation. 2026. Apache JIRA issue tracker. https://issues.apache.org/jira . Ac-cessed August 2026. Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2024. Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Shengyuan Chen, Chuang Zhou, Zheng Yuan, Qinggang Zhang, Zeyang Cui, Hao Chen, Yilin Xiao, Jiannong Cao, and Xiao Huang. 2025. You don’t need pre-built graphs for rag: Retrieval augmented generation with adaptive reasoning structures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06105 .Circlemind AI. 2024. Streamlined and prompt-able fast GraphRAG framework designed for inter-pretable, high-precision, agent-driven retrieval work-flows. https://github.com/circlemind-ai/ fast-graphrag .Gordon V Cormack, Charles LA Clarke, and Stefan Buettcher. 2009. Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods. In 

Proceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in informa-tion retrieval , pages 758–759. Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 .Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. 2024. A survey on rag meeting llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 6491– 6501. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 .Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Weijian Qi, Sizhe Zhou, and Yu Su. 2025. From rag to memory: Non-parametric continual learning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14802 .Haoyu Han, Li Ma, Yu Wang, Harry Shomer, Yongjia Lei, Zhisheng Qi, Kai Guo, Zhigang Hua, Bo Long, Hui Liu, Charu C Aggarwal, and Jiliang Tang. 2025a. Rag vs. graphrag: A systematic evaluation and key insights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11371 .Haoyu Han, Yu Wang, Harry Shomer, Kai Guo, Jiayuan Ding, Yongjia Lei, Mahantesh Halappanavar, Ryan A Rossi, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Xianfeng Tang, et al. 2025b. Retrieval-augmented generation with graphs (graphrag). arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00309 .Kelly Hong, Anton Troynikov, and Jeff Huber. 2025. Context rot: How increasing input tokens impacts LLM performance. Technical report, Chroma. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 33:9459–9474. Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. 2023. An empirical study of catastrophic forgetting in large language mod-els during continual fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08747 .Xing Han Lù. 2024. Bm25s: Orders of magnitude faster lexical search via eager sparse scoring. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.03618. MicrosoftDocs. 2024. SupportArticles-docs: Apublic version to sync with SupportArticles-docs-pr. https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/ SupportArticles-docs . Accessed: 2026-04-11. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Piyushkumar Patel. 2025. Graph-enhanced retrieval-augmented question answering for e-commerce cus-tomer support. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14267 .Chen Qu, Liu Yang, W Bruce Croft, Johanne R Trippas, Yongfeng Zhang, and Minghui Qiu. 2018. Analyzing and characterizing user intent in information-seeking conversations. In The 41st international acm sigir conference on research & development in informa-tion retrieval , pages 989–992. Aditi Singh, Abul Ehtesham, Saket Kumar, Tala Talaei Khoei, and Athanasios V Vasilakos. 2025. Agentic retrieval-augmented generation: A survey on agentic rag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09136 .Hanchen Su, Wei Luo, Yashar Mehdad, Wei Han, Elaine Liu, Wayne Zhang, Mia Zhao, and Joy Zhang. 2025. Llm-friendly knowledge representation for customer support. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Industry Track , pages 496–504. Zhishang Xiang, Chuanjie Wu, Qinggang Zhang, Shengyuan Chen, Zijin Hong, Xiao Huang, and Jin-song Su. 2025. When to use graphs in rag: A com-prehensive analysis for graph retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05690 .Zhentao Xu, Mark Jerome Cruz, Matthew Guevara, Tie Wang, Manasi Deshpande, Xiaofeng Wang, and Zheng Li. 2024. Retrieval-augmented generation with knowledge graphs for customer service question answering. In Proceedings of the 47th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval , pages 2905–2909. Chang Yang, Chuang Zhou, Yilin Xiao, Su Dong, Luyao Zhuang, Yujing Zhang, Zhu Wang, Zijin Hong, Zheng Yuan, Zhishang Xiang, et al. 2026. Graph-based agent memory: Taxonomy, techniques, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05665 .Liu Yang, Minghui Qiu, Chen Qu, Jiafeng Guo, Yongfeng Zhang, W Bruce Croft, Jun Huang, and Haiqing Chen. 2018. Response ranking with deep matching networks and external knowledge in information-seeking conversation systems. In The 41st international acm sigir conference on research & development in information retrieval , pages 245– 254. Guibin Zhang, Muxin Fu, Guancheng Wan, Miao Yu, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng Yan. 2025a. G-memory: Tracing hierarchical memory for multi-agent systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07398 .Qinggang Zhang, Shengyuan Chen, Yuanchen Bei, Zheng Yuan, Huachi Zhou, Zijin Hong, Hao Chen, Yilin Xiao, Chuang Zhou, Junnan Dong, et al. 2025b. A survey of graph retrieval-augmented generation for customized large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13958 .Cen Zhao, Tiantian Zhang, Hanchen Su, Yufeng Zhang, Shaowei Su, Mingzhi Xu, Yu Liu, Wei Han, Jeremy Werner, Claire Na Cheng, et al. 2025. Agent-in-the-loop: A data flywheel for continuous improvement in llm-based customer support. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1919– 1930. Yingli Zhou, Yaodong Su, Youran Sun, Shu Wang, Tao-tao Wang, Runyuan He, Yongwei Zhang, Sicong Liang, Xilin Liu, Yuchi Ma, et al. 2025. In-depth analysis of graph-based rag in a unified framework. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04338 .Luyao Zhuang, Shengyuan Chen, Yilin Xiao, Huachi Zhou, Yujing Zhang, Hao Chen, Qinggang Zhang, and Xiao Huang. 2025. Linearrag: Linear graph re-trieval augmented generation on large-scale corpora. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10114 .A Microsoft Learn Synthetic Dataset 

Microsoft Learn is Microsoft’s public documen-tation site for product guidance, troubleshooting articles, and learning resources. Each troubleshoot-ing article typically documents a specific error or issue, including its symptoms, root cause, and reso-lution steps. Understanding these articles requires technical knowledge spanning multiple products, concepts, and technologies, which makes them a strong foundation for synthetic support case gener-ation. We construct the dataset in two phases: we first build a knowledge base from the source arti-cles, and then generate synthetic cases grounded in that knowledge base and troubleshooting articles. 

Knowledge base construction. Rather than ask-ing agents to read individual articles in isolation and generate cases from them, we first organize the source material into a wiki-style knowledge base. We focus on Windows Server troubleshoot-ing and select seven categories: Active Directory, Group Policy, Licensing and Activation, Remote Desktop, Windows Security, Backup and Storage, and Networking. We use the Claude Code CLI with claude-opus-4-7 to construct this knowl-edge base, running one session per category. Each session spawns sub-agents that work on individ-ual subcategories; each sub-agent reads all source files within its scope and classifies them as trou-bleshooting, informational, or general knowledge. The orchestrating agent then consolidates these re-sults and produces a category overview. 

Case generation. From the indexed knowledge base, we generate synthetic cases on a per-article basis, again with one Claude Code session per cat-egory. To refine the generation process, we apply a simple self-reflection strategy executed by Claude Code itself. Starting from a high-level generation instruction file in Markdown, the agent produces 15 pilot cases by spawning generation sub-agents, then reviews the resulting cases, identifies their shortcomings, and revises the instruction file ac-cordingly. This loop continues until no meaningful improvement is observed, at which point the full generation session is launched for the category. 

Role of the wiki. The key benefit of generating from the wiki is that agents are not confined to the single article they are working from; they also gain awareness of related articles within the same topic area, including their symptoms, root causes, and points of overlap. This cross-article context is what makes the generated cases diagnostically challenging: agents can introduce realistic red her-rings drawn from sibling issues, construct multi-step diagnostic paths in which plausible alternative causes are explored and ruled out, and ensure that no two conversations follow the same troubleshoot-ing sequence. Without the wiki, agents operate in isolation and produce cases that are technically correct but diagnostically straightforward. With the wiki, an initial symptom can plausibly point to several documented root causes, requiring the trou-bleshooting conversation to disambiguate among them. 

Summary. Using this two-phase approach, first building a structured knowledge base and then gen-erating cases informed by it, we processed over 800 source articles across seven Windows Server cat-egories and produced 826 synthetic support cases. We generate 2–4 cases per root cause so that, dur-ing evaluation, each cause group can be split into an indexing set and a test set; all cases within the same group share the same root cause and resolu-tion steps. Below is a short example of a synthetic case.                                                                                                    

> Example Case TKT-ADAUDIT-05 (Group: SEC — Per-missions, Access Control, and Auditing) [Customer →Support] Subject: Auditing logonHours changes for service accounts
> We have an OU of service accounts (OU=ServiceAccounts,DC=tailspintoys,DC=local ). A pen-test finding flagged that someone could remove the logonHours restriction on a service account and use it outside maintenance windows. We want to log
> any change to logonHours on accounts in that OU.
> Directory Service Access and Directory Service Changes auditing are already on. Just need the right SACL to capture logonHours changes specifically (not every attribute). Server 2019 DCs.
> [Agent →Customer] Subject: RE: SACL for lo-gonHours auditing
> For narrow attribute-specific auditing you want a SACL targeting just the logonHours property write. On
> OU=ServiceAccounts :• ADUC >View >Advanced Features. • Right-click the OU >Properties >Security >Ad-vanced >Auditing >Add. • Principal: Everyone ;Type: All ;Applies to:
> Descendant User objects .• Leave Write all properties unchecked; tick only
> Write logonHours .You will get a 5136 event only when logonHours is mod-ified, with the old/new byte array—keeping noise down.
> [Customer →Agent] Subject: RE: SACL for logonHours auditing
> Test passed first try. 5136 with AttributeLDAPDisplayName =logonHours and the new byte value ( OperationType 14674 ). Exactly what we wanted. Thanks.
> Synthetic Annotation Root cause: Customer needed narrow attribute-specific auditing of logonHours changes under
> OU=ServiceAccounts ;broad SACLs would be too noisy, so the SACL had to be scoped to the logonHours
> property only.
> Resolution: Targeted SACL via ADUC Auditing entry (Principal Everyone ,Type All ,Descendant User objects ), ticking only Write logonHours .Validated via a logonHours toggle producing event 5136 .

B Case Extraction: Output Models and Workflow 

B.1 Output Models 

Listing 1: Our output models.                                       

> from typing import Annotated, Self
> from pydantic import BaseModel , ConfigDict,
> Field , model_validator
> class CaseExtraction( BaseModel ): model_config = ConfigDict(extra="forbid") entities: list [Annotated[ str ,Field (
> max_length =120)]] = Field (max_length =25) timeline: list [Annotated[ str ,Field (
> max_length =4800)]] root_cause: str |None =Field (max_length
> =4800) resolution_steps: str |None =Field (
> max_length =4800)
> class CaseReview( BaseModel ): """Final eligibility assessment.""" model_config = ConfigDict(extra="forbid") extractable: bool =Field (strict=True) non_extractable_reasoning: str |None
> @model_validator(mode="after")
> def reasoning_matches_assessment(self) -> Self:
> if self.extractable:
> if self.non_extractable_reasoning is not None :
> raise ValueError("An extractable case must have null non_extractable_reasoning")
> elif (self.non_extractable_reasoning is None or not self.non_extractable_reasoning. strip() ):
> raise ValueError("A non-extractable case requires nonblank non_extractable_reasoning")
> return self

B.2 Agent-based Case Extraction 

Our worker–reviewer workflow separates evidence synthesis from final assessment (Figure 2). Work-ers accumulate and refine a structured case state across bounded inputs; a reviewer checks the com-pleted result and produces an application-defined assessment. Cases are processed independently. The single-worker configuration used in the experi-ments is described in Appendix B.3. 

Context budget and model choice. Processing bounded inputs allows case histories to exceed the model’s context window without placing the entire history in a single invocation. It is also intended to mitigate the degradation associated with long inputs (Hong et al., 2025). The batch size can be adjusted to the model’s context capacity and ability to reliably synthesize complex evidence, leaving room for instructions, metadata, the accumulated state, and tool interactions. 

Bounded, incremental processing. The runner partitions ordered artifacts using a configurable character/token threshold on the source content sup-plied to each worker. Each invocation receives the next batch, case metadata, and the current state in a fresh conversational context. These processing batches are distinct from semantic timeline seg-ments: a pass may produce multiple entries or re-vise earlier entries, and a timeline segment can span batch boundaries. 

An editable state with selective evidence access. 

Workers update the shared case state through JSON Patch, which expresses targeted additions, replace-ments, and removals. This permits later evidence to correct earlier interpretations without requiring the entire output to be regenerated. The state also includes handoff notes for unresolved questions or context that subsequent passes should revisit. All source artifacts remain accessible through a read-only SQLite query tool, allowing agents to in-spect relevant records or selected fields on demand. Workers may additionally use user-provided tools; for example, an error-code database can provide domain knowledge when normalizing the entities in ei.

Final review and traceability. Successful state commits record snapshots and edits in a revision history. After all batches have been processed, the reviewer receives the completed state and case metadata. It can selectively query source evidence Shared workspace illustration 

> Read a little, refine the case, then review the whole result
> Next batch
> Ordered case artifacts

Worker agent 

> Analyze and refine
> Optional additional tools
> e.g., an error-code database tool
> Evolving case state
> Resolution trajectory
> Observation Investigation Finding / resolution
> Handoff notes
> edits next pass

Reviewer agent 

> Audit and correct
> after all batches
> Corrected state + review
> Source evidence
> Selective SQL access for both agents
> Revision history
> Recorded edits and snapshots for reviewer audit
> State changes are targeted JSON Patch edits; the updated state, not the prior conversation, carries forward.

Figure 2: Agent-based case extraction workflow. A worker processes bounded batches and updates an evolving case state, which is carried into subsequent passes. Both agents can selectively query source evidence, and the reviewer can additionally inspect revision history, correct the completed state, and produce a structured assessment. Workers may use additional domain-specific tools. 

and revision history to investigate omissions or conflicting interpretations, correct the state using the same editing mechanism, and return a separate structured assessment ρi.

Assessment and downstream policy. The as-sessment schema is application-defined. It can contain case-type or outcome labels, such as miti-gated , request for information (RFI) , or resolved ,alongside actionability judgments and supporting reasoning. Labels characterize a case rather than automatically excluding it. The workflow returns the complete state and assessment; user-defined filters can then determine which cases to store or which stored cases to include in retrieval ranking. The actionability flag in Figure 1 illustrates one simple use of this more general assessment. 

B.3 Indexing Process 

Cases in our experimental datasets average only a few thousand tokens, so each case is processed by a single worker invocation. 

C Experiments 

C.1 Metrics 

We evaluate retrieval quality with three complemen-tary metrics. Let D denote the evaluation set. Each example i ∈ D consists of a query qi, a ground-truth shared id s⋆i identifying the underlying issue, gold root-cause text r⋆i , gold resolution-steps text 

a⋆i , the retrieved context string Ci, and the set of re-trieved case ids Ri. We write sid( c) for the shared id of a retrieved case c.

Case Hit. Measures whether retrieval surfaces 

any case belonging to the same underlying issue as the query. 

CH i = 1[ s⋆i ∈ { sid( c) : c ∈ R i} ] , (2) 

CH = 1

|D| 

X

i∈D 

CH i. (3) 

Root Cause Coverage. Quantifies how much of the gold root-cause explanation is actually sup-ported by the retrieved context. An LLM judge (i) atomizes r⋆i into a set of claims K(r⋆i ) =

{k1, . . . , k ni }, and (ii) verdicts each claim kj

against Ci as vij ∈ { 0, 1}, where vij = 1 iff kj is entailed by Ci:

RCC i = 1

niniX

j=1 

vij , (4) 

RCC = 1

|D| 

X

i∈D 

RCC i. (5) This rewards retrieving evidence that actually di-agnoses the issue, rather than merely co-occurring with the correct case. 

Resolution Steps Coverage. Analogously mea-sures how much of the gold remediation procedure is supported by the retrieved context. The gold steps a⋆i are atomized into K(a⋆i ) = {k1, . . . , k mi }

and each claim is verdicted against Ci to obtain 

uij ∈ { 0, 1}:

RSC i = 1

mimiX

> j=1

uij , (6) 

RSC = 1

|D| 

X

> i∈D

RSC i. (7) This rewards retrieving the evidence needed to act on the issue. 

C.2 Baseline Configurations 

• Vanilla RAG : We use a chunk size of 256 tokens with a 64-token overlap for indexing. At retrieval time, we return the unique cases associated with the top-ranked chunks, in rank order. • HippoRAG2 : We use the default settings and operate directly on each case. Their imple-mentation applies no chunking by default; this suffices because all cases fit within the token limit of our chosen embedding model, and pre-liminary experiments with a chunked variant yielded worse performance for this baseline. • Fast-GraphRAG : We adopt the default chunking configuration from the implementa-tion. For retrieval, we preserve the implemen-tation’s default budget ratios and apply them to our 6,000-token budget, allocating 1,500 tokens to entities, 1,125 tokens to relations, and 3,375 tokens to chunks. 

C.3 Uncertainty Analysis 

For the paired uncertainty analysis, we rerun RAFT and vanilla RAG on identical held-out groups, progress points, and context budgets across the five splits, producing a paired result for every query. We then bootstrap the underlying issue-group clus-ters across all splits, rather than treating only five split-level averages as the inferential sample, and report percentile 95% confidence intervals for the paired differences in Table 5. All three Case Hit gains are statistically supported. Every uncondi-tional coverage point estimate also favors RAFT; the early-stage coverage gains and the 30% root-cause gain are statistically supported, the 30% reso-lution gain is small and near the interval boundary, and we make no late-stage coverage claim. 

Metric Progress RAFT − Vanilla (pp) [95% CI] 

Case Hit 0% +16 .79 [+13 .91 , +19 .78 ]Case Hit 30% +14 .79 [+12 .02 , +17 .73 ]Case Hit 60% +12 .19 [+9 .75 , +14 .68 ]Root cause 0% +5 .69 [+3 .35 , +8 .07 ]Root cause 30% +4 .15 [+1 .88 , +6 .56 ]Root cause 60% +1 .88 [−0.07 , +3 .89 ]Resolution 0% +2 .98 [+1 .03 , +4 .99 ]Resolution 30% +2 .01 [+0 .09 , +3 .97 ]Resolution 60% +0 .57 [−1.18 , +2 .32 ]

Table 5: Paired differences between RAFT and vanilla RAG in percentage points (pp), with issue-group-clustered bootstrap 95% CIs. 

C.4 Query Robustness 

We run a paired controlled-noise study at 30% and 60% progress across the same five held-out splits. For each clean query, both RAFT and vanilla RAG receive the identical deterministic perturbation: (i) adjacent-character swaps in 2% of words of length at least five, (ii) removal of 40% of observed up-dates while preserving the initial report, or (iii) in-sertion of one turn from an unrelated issue category. We then measure each method’s Case Hit change relative to its result on the corresponding clean query; Table 6 reports the changes in percentage points, with positive paired differences favoring RAFT.                                         

> Perturbation Progress RAFT (pp) Vanilla (pp) Paired diff. (pp) [95% CI]
> Light typos 30% −0.11 −0.22 +0 .11 [−0.44 ,+0 .66 ]Light typos 60% 0.00 +0 .33 −0.33 [−1.05 ,+0 .39 ]40% update dropout 30% −0.39 −1.05 +0 .66 [−0.89 ,+2 .22 ]40% update dropout 60% −0.83 −1.27 +0 .44 [−1.39 ,+2 .33 ]One unrelated turn 30% −11 .14 −25 .93 +14 .79 [+11 .52 ,+18 .06 ]One unrelated turn 60% −9.36 −49 .31 +39 .94 [+35 .73 ,+44 .10 ]

Table 6: Case Hit change under paired, deterministic query perturbations, in percentage points (pp) relative to the corresponding clean query. Positive paired differ-ences favor RAFT. 

The changes under typos and missing updates are small for both methods, and the between-method differences are not statistically resolved. The unrelated turn is substantially harder and degrades vanilla RAG much more than RAFT. These are controlled query-robustness and within-benchmark results, not evidence of noisy-corpus robustness, production-scale behavior, or cross-domain generalization. 

C.5 Graph Contribution and Sensitivity 

In graph construction, k is a pre-symmetrization sparsity cap: we rank cross-case candidates us-ing the hybrid semantic/lexical score, retain the top k, remove links below a fixed 0.6 embedding-similarity threshold, and then symmetrize the re-tained links, so a case can acquire more than k final neighbors through incoming links. To isolate the graph’s marginal contribution, we compare pure entry-level retrieval with a budget-matched graph condition that reserves one of the five case slots for one-hop expansion from the di-rectly retrieved seeds. Full-sibling recovery asks, for issue groups with two correct sibling cases avail-able in the index, whether both are retrieved. Ta-ble 7 reports the sparsest tested setting, k = 3 .            

> Progress Direct recovery With expansion Change (pp)
> 0% 73.71% 75.65% +1 .94
> 30% 79.84% 82.74% +2 .90
> 60% 88.71% 88.55% −0.16

Table 7: Full-sibling recovery without and with budget-matched graph expansion ( k = 3 ; four direct anchors plus one graph-expanded slot). 

At k = 3 , graph expansion modestly improves sibling diversity at early and intermediate progress; at 60%, direct retrieval is already high and the re-sult is effectively unchanged. Overall Case Hit changes by only +0 .22 , −0.28 , and −0.06 pp at 0%, 30%, and 60%, respectively. As a sensitivity check, k = 5 and k = 10 produce nearly identical results: across the three graph settings, Case Hit varies by at most 0.17 pp and full-sibling recovery by at most 0.81 pp. The conclusion is therefore not sensitive to k in this benchmark, and we use k = 3 

throughout, presenting graph expansion as an op-tional evidence-diversification mechanism rather than the source of RAFT’s main retrieval gain. 

C.6 Additional Experiments 

We conduct two additional experiments. First, we examine how indexing-model capacity affects RAFT’s retrieval quality. Second, we evaluate an agentic setting in which the agent composes its own search queries and filtering conditions given the same 0%, 30%, and 60% case context used in the main experiments. Note that in this paper we extract general-purpose entities. For domain-specific deployments, we recommend replacing these with application-specific entities (e.g., error codes, Windows ver-sion) that uniquely characterize a case; such enti-ties enable agents to write more targeted queries and further narrow the search space. Table 8 reports an ablation on indexing-model capacity, in which we replace the default indexing model gpt-5.2 with the smaller gpt-5.4-mini 

and gpt-5.4-nano , and separately reduce the reasoning effort from medium to low . Both 

gpt-5.4-mini and the low-reasoning setting yield only modest drops, whereas gpt-5.4-nano de-grades more noticeably, as expected for a substan-tially less capable model. Extraction quality there-fore matters, but smaller models remain viable un-der cost constraints, offering a practical trade-off for large-scale deployments.                               

> Method Case Hit Root Cause Coverage Resolution Steps Coverage 0% Case Progress
> RAFT (low reasoning) 0.827 0.649 0.573 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-mini )0.823 0.603 0.536 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-nano )0.772 0.590 0.492
> 30% Case Progress
> RAFT (low reasoning) 0.868 0.686 0.597 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-mini )0.855 0.627 0.555 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-nano )0.800 0.611 0.545
> 60% Case Progress
> RAFT (low reasoning) 0.886 0.705 0.629 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-mini )0.871 0.643 0.575 RAFT ( gpt-5.4-nano )0.855 0.631 0.554

Table 8: Ablation on indexing-model capacity. We replace the default gpt-5.2 with smaller models (gpt-5.4-mini , gpt-5.4-nano ) to assess sensitivity to extraction quality. 

In the agentic setting, we expose RAFT to the agent as a tool that filters cases by the category of the active case and retrieves similar cases from agent-supplied search queries. The agent is in-structed to compose queries that reflect its current understanding of the issue, using the same case context at the 0%, 30%, and 60% progress points as in the main experiments. As shown in Table 9, this improves Case Hit across all progress points. 

Case Hit Case Progress Method 0% 30% 60% 

RAFT-Agent 0.910 0.910 0.919 

Table 9: Agentic retrieval with RAFT. The agent com-poses its own queries and filtering conditions; Case Hit improves over the non-agentic baseline (Table 2). C.7 Deployment Considerations 

Compared with vanilla RAG, RAFT incurs addi-tional LLM cost to distill historical cases during indexing. This reflects a trade-off between offline preparation and inference-time context consump-tion. Vanilla RAG avoids LLM-based extraction at indexing time, but returning raw cases requires the troubleshooting agent to read long case histories to reconstruct the relevant investigation and resolu-tion, potentially repeating this work across queries. RAFT performs this distillation offline and reuses compact case representations, reducing the tokens needed to convey each case’s trajectory. Our re-trieval results also show that these representations identify similar cases more accurately under the same context budget (Table 2). The resulting end-to-end cost trade-off depends on query volume and how much retrieved context the agent consumes. RAFT also supports incremental updates through independent case processing. Adding or re-vising a case requires extracting that case and updat-ing the retrieval index and case-level graph, without re-extracting other cases. This independence sim-plifies maintenance relative to GraphRAG pipelines whose shared entity graphs and community sum-maries introduce dependencies across documents. Finally, the extraction workflow summarizes a documented investigation rather than solving the case anew, allowing smaller, cheaper models to perform this offline step. Our indexing-model ab-lation supports this option: gpt-5.4-mini retains strong retrieval performance, while the larger degra-dation with gpt-5.4-nano illustrates the trade-off between extraction-model capacity and retrieval quality (Table 8). 

D Apache Jira Evaluation Set 

We freeze public issue histories from Apache Cas-sandra, Hadoop, HBase, and Spark. Jira contribu-tors mark a later report as a Duplicate of an older issue in their normal workflow; we use the later re-port as the held-out query and the older issue as the exact target only if it was already resolved Fixed 

before the query opened. Other cases serve as dis-tractors, not certified semantic negatives, because Jira links may be incomplete. The construction pipeline proceeds as follows. Starting from 2,082 raw duplicate pairs, metadata filters retain 85 pairs whose older target was al-ready Fixed and whose histories were sufficiently substantive. Pre-disclosure, leakage, length, near-copy, and one-pair-per-component filters reduce these to 41 candidate groups. Manual audit then removes 8 semantically mismatched or ambiguous links and 3 leakage-affected groups, leaving 30 au-dited groups. The final corpus contains 600 cases: the 30 gold targets and 570 Fixed distractors. By project, the 30 groups comprise 12 from Cassan-dra, 5 from Hadoop, 2 from HBase, and 11 from Spark; the distractors comprise 143 from Cassan-dra, 143 from Hadoop, 142 from HBase, and 142 from Spark. All 30 groups are evaluable at the 0% and 30% progress points; at 60%, the 19 groups with sufficient pre-disclosure history (6 Cassandra, 4 Hadoop, 2 HBase, 7 Spark) are evaluated. We apply the same extraction prompt, schema, and retrieval procedure as the synthetic experi-ments; the one configuration difference is a 5,000-token context cap instead of 6,000. Each query retrieves five cases, and results are averaged over five indexing seeds. We report Case Hit only, be-cause the dataset provides no gold root-cause or resolution-step annotations from which to compute coverage metrics. Given the 30-group scale, we report no confidence intervals and treat the result as directional transfer evidence.