Title: 2025.findings-emnlp.994.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.994.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 31 Oct 2025 19:48:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 18318–18336 November 4-9, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Learning of API Functionality from In-Context Demonstrations for Tool-based Agents 

## Bhrij Patel †

## University of Maryland, College Park 

## Ashish Jagmohan *

## Emergence AI NYC, New York 

> †

## Work done while intern at Emergence AI 

> *

## Equal Advising Code and Data Repository 

## Aditya Vempaty *

## Emergence AI NYC, New York 

## Abstract 

Digital tool-based agents, powered by Large Language Models (LLMs), that invoke external Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) of-ten rely on documentation to understand API functionality. However, such documentation is frequently missing, outdated, privatized, or inconsistent—hindering the development of re-liable, general-purpose agents. In this work, we propose a new research direction: learning of API functionality directly from in-context demonstrations. This task is a new paradigm applicable in scenarios without documentation. Using API benchmarks, we collect demon-strations from both expert agents and from self-exploration. To understand what infor-mation demonstrations must convey for suc-cessful task completion, we extensively study how the number of demonstrations and the use of LLM-generated summaries and evalu-ations affect the task success rate of the API-based agent. Our experiments across 3 datasets and 6 models show that learning functional-ity from in-context demonstrations remains a non-trivial challenge, even for state-of-the-art LLMs. We find that providing explicit func-tion calls and natural language critiques signif-icantly improves the agent’s task success rate due to more accurate parameter filling. We an-alyze failure modes, identify sources of error, and highlight key open challenges for future work in documentation-free, self-improving, API-based agents. 

## 1 Introduction 

In the past few years, AI agents have been rapidly adopted in society due to the development of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), allowing for superb perfor-mance in natural language understanding, sum-marization, and generation. More recently, tool-based agents have been introduced to increase the abilities of agents for specialized tasks that may even require up-to-date knowledge of external 

Figure 1: Expert demonstration of the email.reply_email function extracted from WorkBench dataset (Styles et al., 2024). Demonstrations are the basis of how agents understand functionality without prior documentation. 

databases, such as in cases for enterprise work-flows (Styles et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Tool-based agents can select and call external functions like Application Program-ming Interface 1 (API) functions. API-based agents can automate digital tasks in various domains such as finance, health, and analytics (An et al., 2024; Gawade et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2024). A common, crucial requirement for API-based agents is access to API documentation that explains to the agent in natural language the functionality of the specific API functions available (Kim et al., 2024; Styles et al., 2024). The documentation ex-plains both 1) what the function does and returns (if anything), and 2) what the input parameter schema is. Both these components are important for tool selection and their execution by the agent. How-ever, API documentation can frequently be unavail-able, inconsistent, unstructured, or out-of-date (Li et al., 2022; Khan et al., 2021; Zhong and Su, 2013). Prior work in software engineering research on API 

> 1In this work, “tool” and “API” are used interchangeably, as our work can be extended to any external tool with an API wrapper.

18318 documentation generation (Khan and Uddin, 2022; Yang et al., 2023) lacks evaluation of the generated documents via downstream tasks by an LLM-based agent. Other work (Tang et al., 2023) generates API documentation by inputting a brief description of the function into an LLM, and this documenta-tion is then used by an agent. However, a rigorous analysis of learning functionality with no prior doc-umentation or description remains absent in the API-based agent literature. We address these gaps by introducing and for-malizing the problem of learning API function-ality from scratch via in-context demonstrations of tool calls. Demonstrations of tool calls are present within codebases of public repositories and logs. While prior work has finetuned agents on demonstrations (Schick et al., 2023), we focus on in-context learning to remove the need to update parameters. In this work, we analyze the ability of an API-based agent with a frozen LLM with only access to demonstrations of tool calls to learn functionality to perform tasks. Using various API datasets, we extract and standardize demonstrations for the agent to learn from, to perform the dataset tasks. Our experiments revolve around three main pillars. We investigate the effect of 1) the num-ber of demonstrations and 2) the representation of the demonstrations. Specifically, we compare, in terms of downstream task performance, between providing the demonstrations directly, generating documentation from the demonstrations, or a com-bination of both. Furthermore, we also show the impact of 3) collecting, evaluating, and summariz-ing experiences of the agent to update its under-standing of the APIs. Our results consistently show across experiments the difficulties of the agent to perform tasks, highlighting how non-trivial learn-ing of API functionality from in-context demonstra-tions is, even with state-of-the-art (SoTA) LLMs. We summarize our main contributions below: • Novel, Applicable Problem. We present the problem of learning of API functionality from in-context demonstrations without any initial ground-truth documentation. Our work is the first work that removes the assumption of ac-cess to documentation, and the agent must rely solely on demonstrations to understand func-tionality. We formalize this problem with an optimization objective to characterize the task success rate’s dependence on the information processing of the demonstrations. • Various Methods to Learn From Demon-strations. To tackle this new issue, we present 

3 processing methods to learn from a set of demonstrations while also providing 4 meth-ods to update the functionality understanding from the experiences collected by the agent’s self-exploration. We also incorporate an LLM-based evaluator to provide richer, natural lan-guage feedback on each step the agent takes. • Empirical Evaluation and Analysis. We conduct experiments with our methods, show-ing that learning of API functionality from in-context demonstrations for downstream task completion is challenging for existing LLMs, highlighting the need for further research. We wish to answer what is needed to maximize performance given a set of demonstrations. From our experiments, we find that a cen-tral recurrent problem is filling in parameter values, leading up to a 39% decrease in an agent’s success rate if the method for process-ing demonstrations incorrectly describes the parameter schema. 

## 2 Preliminaries: Task Completion with API-based Agents 

Consider a goal-conditioned Partially Ob-servable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) 

(G, S, O, F, P, Z, r ). G is a set of goals, which we refer to as “tasks”, that the user could ask. (e.g. “Reply to my last email from Dev with the body ‘Let us catch up soon to discuss the project.’ ” 2); state s ∈ S in the digital environment could be a set of employees, emails, calendar events, etc.; O

is the information the agent currently knows (e.g. Dev’s email is dev@business.com); F is the set of function names (e.g. reply_email) the agent can choose to execute; P (f ) is the parameter schema given whose domain contains the valid inputs of 

f ∈ F (e.g. email ID and message). Z represents the transition dynamics. Executing function f and input parameters p ∈ dom (P (f )) at s results in the new state and observation s′, o ′ = Z(s, f, p ) (e.g. 

s′ is Dev having a new message in his inbox and o′

is the agent receiving a message that the email was sent). Finally, r(s′|g) : S × G → { 0, 1}, where 

r = 1 indicates task g is completed correctly. Note that r is not dependent on o′ as the observation may not correctly indicate task completion (e.g. 

> 2Example task from WorkBench dataset (Styles et al., 2024).

18319 “Email sent successfully” is returned to the agent, but the email is sent to the wrong person.) In this work, the policy π of that API-based agent that completes tasks is a fixed LLM 3.For an LLM-based agent to understand the func-tions in F, it needs a textual description, or textu-alization , of P , and Z (e.g., API documentation). Let T ∗ 

> P

, T ∗ 

> Z

be the set of all possible textualizations of P and Z, respectively, that correctly convey the functionality of F. With tp ∈ T ∗ 

> P

, t z ∈ T ∗ 

> Z

, an agent selects an API with input parameters with a policy (f, p ) ∼ π(·| o, F, t p, t z , g ). In practice, the LLM agent generates a JSON object detailing the chosen f and p that will be passed to another program to execute. Note that π is treated as a prob-ability due to the inherent randomness of LLMs. However, given the agent has access to some tp and 

tz , it can make appropriate decisions. 

Limitation in Prior Work: Access to tp and tz .

As mentioned previously, API documentation is often inaccessible, out-of-date, or inconsistent with the functionality of the APIs. Thus, the agent may not have access to some tp and tz , and we aim to learn and model the information as tθp and tθz for 

P and Z, respectively. Ideally tθp ∈ T ∗ 

> P

and tθz ∈

T ∗ 

> Z

. We wish to maximize the total successful task completions with (tθp, t θz ). Letting H be the number of steps an agent performed to try to complete g,we can formally write 

max  

> θ

J(θ) = 

∑

> g∈G

E(fh,p h)∼π(·| oh,F,t θp,t θz ,g ) [RH ] , (1) where RH = ∑Hh=0 r(sh+1 |g), (sh+1 , o h+1 ) = 

Z(oh, f h, p h). Equation 1 provides a mathemat-ical grounding of how well tθp and tθz textualize the unknown P and Z to how well the LLM-based agent performs the set of tasks G. The next section details how we tackle this problem by learning θ

via demonstrations of API function calls. 

## 3 Learning of API Functionality from In-Context Demonstrations 

Although API documentation may inaccessible, of-ten there are demonstrations available based on codebases of public repositories and logs. With this in mind, we investigate how we can utilize   

> 3We will use the terms “agent” and “policy” interchange-ably; so πrefers to both.

these demonstrations to learn API functionality in-context without updating the LLM parameters. 

3.1 Demonstration Definition and Format 

For each API function f , we aim to obtain a collec-tion of expert demonstrations Df

> expert

, where each demonstration d ∈ Df 

> expert

is a single use case of f

for a given task. We also define a demonstration trajectory as a series of demonstrations to complete a task. A trajectory of length M can be comprised of demonstrations of at most M distinct functions. Each demonstration must show not only the func-tion call itself, but also the context of the call. To display the context of the call, we need the task it is trying to perform and the previous steps taken to complete the task. Demonstrations of single-step tasks or initial steps have an empty list of calls for the previous steps. Figure 1 shows an example demonstration of the reply_email func-tion from the WorkBench dataset by (Styles et al., 2024). In this example, the reply_email function is trying to reply to an email as mentioned in the “Overall Task/Query” section and is preceded by the search_emails function that is necessary to find the email_id value. 

Expert Demonstrations. We define an “expert demonstration” as a demonstration produced by an agent that used ground-truth, original documenta-tion. We propose that instead of relying on prior documentation, we can learn P and Z and model their textualization as tθp and tθz via demonstrations of the function calls used to complete tasks. With a set of expert demonstrations Dexpert , we can obtain the textualization (tθp, t θz ) = I(Dexpert ), where I is a method for processing the demonstrations. We can thus rewrite Equation 1 as 

max  

> I

J(I) = 

∑

> g∈G

E(fh,p h)∼π(·| oh,F,I (Dexpert ),g ) [RH ] . (2) We want to process the information from a given 

Dexpert to maximize performance. 

3.2 Methods for Processing Expert Demonstrations 

In all of the methods for I described below, for each f ∈ F that has at least N training expert demonstrations, |Dftrain | ≥ N , we sample a set of 

N random demonstrations Df,N train .

1) Direct Expert Demonstrations (DxD). We pass the f × N demonstrations directly to π.18320 Figure 2: Processing Methods of Expert Demonstrations: Given a set of training demonstrations for each function        

> f, we sample Ndemonstrations for each function to be used for either (TOP) LLM-based documentation generation or (BOTTOM) to be directly passed into the agent.

2) Generated Documentation With the sampled 

Df,N train , we use an LLM generator to produce documentation for f . We repeat for all f that have at least N demonstrations. The system prompt for the generator is provided in Appendix E. 

3) Generated Documents with Example Calls (GDEC). We combine the previous approaches by generating a document of f with Df,N train and then appending the function calls of those demon-strations to the bottom of the generated document as example use cases. See “Demonstration of Function” in Figure 1 for an example call. We do not give the task or previous steps like with DxD. 

4) Oracle Baseline: Original Documentation (OD). We give the agent the original, ground-truth documentation provided by the given dataset. This baseline is essentially the “expert” agent. Figure 2 visualizes the pipeline for DxD and GD. The same Df,N train used for DxD are also used for GD for f . For GDEC, the function calls from all sampled N demonstrations of f are attached to the generated document of f .

3.3 Experiences from Self-Exploration Demonstrations from Experience. To understand how the agent can improve its understanding of the API functionality after initial learning from ex-pert demonstrations, we study how self-exploration can be used to gather useful observations. Before having the agent π perform test query tasks, we have it complete training tasks. Given Dtrain and a processing method I, the agent uses its resulting 

(tθp, t θz ) to complete tasks in the training set. Each function call the agent takes to complete a task is an experience of some function f . Ex-periences are a different source of demonstrations, apart from expert demonstrations. For each func-tion call the agent takes, combined with the result-ing return value, is a new demonstration. Further-more, in some sandbox environments like Work-Bench (Styles et al., 2024), the agent will some-times provide its thought process before the call. We add that to the experience-based demonstration. We store each experience to be used to help the agent with the test tasks. Figure 3 gives an exam-ple self-exploration experience of the same task in Figure 1. Here, the agent uses reply_email prema-turely and receives an “Email not found.” Rather than throwing at incorrect uses, we provide richer feedback and distinguish between positive and neg-ative experiences by implementing an LLM-based evaluator, which we describe next. 

Evaluating Self-Exploration with LLM Judges. 

Due to the expensive nature of repeated LLM calls, one would want to extract more feedback from the experience than just whether or not the task was completed. However, the reward signal for the ex-periment setup described so far has been the sparse, binary reward function of whether or not the task was completed. To synthesize more feedback from the collected experience, we pass each experience to an LLM-based evaluator to produce a natural language critique. We add this evaluation to the experience. We provide the LLM-based judge the task, the entire trajectory by π, whether or not the trajectory was correct, and the specific demonstra-tion we wish to analyze. Therefore, if the trajectory had three function calls, we would make three calls to the LLM-judge, changing only the demonstra-tion to evaluate. We ask it to specifically look at whether or not it was a 1) repeated call, 2) whether the parameter filling is accurate, and 3) whether the function is used in the right place in the trajectory. 18321 Figure 3: Experience-based demonstration gained during self-exploration by π for the same task in Figure 1. This experience includes the thought process and return of the reply_email function. Note that this is an incorrect use of reply_email. The “Evaluation of Demonstration” is shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 gives an example self-exploration trajec-tory from the same task in Figures 1 and 3 and the generated LLM-based evaluation of the first, incor-rect reply_email call (shown in Figure 3) and the second, correct reply_email call in that trajectory. We see that it correctly flags the error of the first re-ply_email call, mentioning that a search_email call should have preceded it to find the right email_id, and that it flags the second reply email call as cor-rect. See Appendix E for system prompts of the evaluator and summarizer. With these experiences, we can update the tex-tualizations as (tθp, t θz ) = I′(Dexpert , D experience ),where I′ is a processing method that takes in both the expert demonstrations and experience. 

3.4 Methods for Processing Experiences 1) Direct Experience (DE). For each f , we pass in Df 

> experience

with expert demonstrations Dftrain as the descriptions. If |Df

> experience

| = 0 , only Dftrain 

is used instead. 

2) Updated Documentation (UD). We take the initial generated document of f (GD) and use an LLM to update the document using the experiences of f . If |Df

> experience

| = 0 , the GD of f is used. 

3) Regenerated Documentation (RD). We regenerate the documentation from scratch using both expert demonstrations and experiences. If 

|Df

> experience

| = 0 , the GD of f is used. 

4) Attached Guidelines (AG). An LLM summa-rizer takes in the experiences of f and generates guidelines. We then attach those guidelines to the initial generated document from expert demonstra-tions (GD) of f . Figure 5 gives an example lesson generated from all the self-exploration experiences         

> Figure 4: LLM-Generated Evaluation of Self-Exploration Trajectory by πfor same task in Figures 1 and 3. The agent incorrectly tries to reply email with-out searching for the email ID. It then corrects itself by executing search_email and then correctly using re-ply_email again. The first reply_id is formatted into the demonstration shown in Figure 3. The evaluation of the first reply_email call emphasizes that the agent should have first confirmed it had the right email ID. The evaluation for the second reply_email call states it was correctly used after the agent found the email ID with search_email. Each of these evaluations is added to the demonstration of their respective calls.

of reply_email. If |Df

> experience

| = 0 , the GD of f is used without any guidelines. Figure 7 in the Appendix provides a visual pipeline delineating the process of self-exploration on training queries, evaluating experiences, and the methods used to update θ for test-time. The sys-tem prompts for the LLM document updater and summarizer are given in Appendix E. 

## 4 Experimental Setup 

In this section, we provide the experimental details for studying our methods of learning of API func-tionality from in-context demonstrations. Across our experiments, we run 3 trials, each with a differ-ent random seed: 2003 , 2004 , 2005 .

Train-Test Splitting Expert Demonstrations. To ensure that we do not evaluate the LLM agent on tasks it has seen from its demonstrations, we divide the tasks and demonstrations with a train-test split. Furthermore, we also have to ensure that no task in the test set includes an API not seen in the training set. Simply train-test splitting the set of tasks and removing test tasks that include APIs not in the training set can greatly reduce the number of test tasks to evaluate on. Therefore, for our train-test 18322 Figure 5: Summarized guidelines from experiences and evaluations of reply_email. The lesson emphasizes using search_email beforehand to find the right email_id to use for reply_email, which the agent sometimes did not do as shown in Figure 4. 

split, we iterate through each API function avail-able. For each API f , we train-test split the tasks it is associated with if the task has not already been assigned to the train or test set from a previous it-eration. We then use the demonstrations for all the training tasks as the training set, Dtrain . For every train-test split in this iterative process, use a split of 70 − 30% on the remaining tasks that have yet to be assigned a set. This process, while dividing the demonstrations as we desire, creates variability in the number of test queries across seed numbers. Appendix A details the train-test approach in depth. 

Sampling Expert Demonstrations. When com-paring the effect of N demonstrations of f against that of N + k demonstrations, we ensure that the 

Df,N train ⊂ Df,N +ktrain .

Environments. We utilize three API benchmarks: 

WorkBench (Styles et al., 2024) τ -Bench (retail) 

(Yao et al., 2024), and CRMArena (Huang et al., 2025). We utilize these benchmarks because they focus on multi-step queries. Furthermore, each has its own sandbox environment to execute its func-tion, ensuring reliability in evaluation that is absent from other API benchmarks (Kim et al., 2024). We augment each sandbox environment so that we can change the tool descriptions given to the agent to experiment with the methods described above. In Appendix C, we detail how we standardized each dataset to fit our demonstration and documentation formats. For WorkBench, we created demonstra-tions from the pre-computed trajectories available in the repository that were generated by a GPT-4-powered agent that used ground-truth, original documentation. We did the same with τ -Bench, where those pre-computed trajectories are from a GPT-4.5-based agent. For CRMArena, we regen-erated the expert trajectories using GPT-4o as that was their default model. For both τ -Bench and CRMArena, the return values for each step were included in the expert trajectories, so we added the return of a function call to the demonstration. 

The Presence of Noisy, Suboptimal Expert Demonstrations. An important note is how we extracted expert demonstrations. We only used demonstrations from trajectories from the expert agent if it got an r = 1 from its environment. How-ever, this heuristic has its flaws in cases where the evaluation is outcome-centric, where only the ending state of the environment matters. So, for example, the agent tries to send an email to an ad-dress that does not exist (e.g. nadia@example.com in WorkBench). Even though it is a wrong step, the environment does not change due to the email not going to any inbox. If the agent self-corrects by then searching for the right email and retrying to send the email, all demonstrations are used in the expert demonstration pool. 

Models. For experiments with the entire pipeline, we utilize o3-mini, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, as this set contains reasoning and non-reasoning models. For each experiment, we use the same model across the system. To include open-source models, we use Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1 (Mistral) and gemma-2b-it (Gemma) to analyze document generation. 

Evaluation. For task completion, we report the mean success rate (SR) over the three trials. 

Filtering Tasks with Unavailable APIs. In the next section, we compare the agent task success rate with different methods I for expert demon-strations. We compare the different methods and also the number of demonstrations from N =

{5, 15 , 25 , 35 }. If an API in a dataset did not have at least 35 demonstrations, we removed that API from the set of available API the agent can use. Therefore, we filtered out any task that relies on any f where |Dftrain | < 35 when comparing dif-ferent I. When comparing different I′ after self-exploration, we set N = 5 for the two I methods, DxD and GD, we use before self-exploration. Thus, we filtered out queries that relied on any f where 

|Dftrain | < 5. We report the average number of test queries next to each dataset in Tables 1 and 2. 

## 5 Results: Learning Parameter Information Is Crucial 

From our experiments, a recurring problem at ev-ery stage of the pipeline (document generation, task completion, and evaluation) is the parameter fill-18323 Benchmark Method o3-mini gpt-4o-mini gpt-4o No. of Expert Demonstrations 5 15 25 35 5 15 25 35 5 15 25 35 WorkBench DxD 41.53 39 .24 38 .03 40 .25 50.65 34 .15 35 .85 40 .09 17.76 16 .53 14 .90 15 .51                                                                                                                

> GD 28 .86 30 .07 28 .68 24 .74 32 .37 21 .96 22 .93 15 .46 15 .01 15 .00 14 .60 14 .81
> (55 Tasks) GDEC 32 .56 26 .36 26 .30 27 .52 40 .37 28 .87 26 .09 30 .44 15 .97 15 .16 14 .76 15 .37
> OD 24 .16 17 .19 17 .31
> τ-Bench DxD 48 .49 12 .89 0.00 0.00 42 .12 0.00 0.00 0.00 54 .59 0.00 0.00 0.00
> GD 10 .44 5.62 6.43 8.03 35 .34 27 .31 38 .15 21 .29 27 .71 31 .33 21 .69 13 .25
> (77.6 Tasks) GDEC 40 .96 40 .16 34 .94 34 .94 56 .63 66 .27 65 .06 51 .058 .23 53 .82 53 .01 39 .76
> OD 78.59 69.08 86.30
> CRMArena DxD 69 .24 67 .22 0.00 0.00 12 .02 0.00 0.00 0.00 66 .33 0.00 0.00 0.00
> GD 52 .30 49 .86 18 .86 39 .22 0.00.00.00.08.20 14 .19 15 .84 14 .38
> (183 Tasks) GDEC 60 .49 51 .88 45 .92 9.96 7.51 11 .52 0.00.054 .13 49 .91 0.00 0.00
> OD 72.14 29.26 84.53

Table 1: The models specified in the top row indicate the LLM used as the API-based agent and the document generator. All experiments ran across 3 trials, and all values reported are the mean success rate (%). Bolded values are the highest SR given a dataset and model. 

ing. Parameter filling has also been indicated as a problem by Styles et al. (2024); Yao et al. (2024) for WorkBench and τ -Bench, respectively. We now show how the problem increases in difficulty in scenarios with no ground-truth documentation. 

Document Generation Has Problems With Spec-ifying Parameter Information. One main issue is generating parameter information. Many times, generators hallucinated input parameters that did not exist or left out input parameters seen in the demonstrations. This occurred even when in the system prompt we stated not to hallucinate and only focus on the parameters it saw. Thus, given a set of demonstrations for f , we programmatically found all used input parameters and explicitly mentioned in the user prompt to generate information on only these parameters. That solved the issue for the OpenAI models and Gemma. However, documents generated by Mistral many times do not include parameter information (see Figure 13 in the Ap-pendix). Other sources of error were more specific, such as when generated documents would spec-ify to include timezone information for time_min and time_max parameters in WorkBench functions. Agents that followed this got a runtime error. The generated documents from more demonstrations would more frequently make this mistake, and also say that the time_min and time_max parameters were required when they were optional. Docu-ments generated from fewer demonstrations would, in some trials, correctly say that those parameters were optional, allowing the agent to not fill in those parameters with incorrect formatting. We hypothe-size that the more repeated use of these parameters in the larger set of demonstrations causes the doc-ument generator to believe that those are required, causing the degradation in Table 1 as N increases. 

Generated Guidelines Can Help Parameter Un-derstanding. Attaching generated guidelines (AG) has a 12% improvement over (GD) in WorkBench. In a representative case, “Kerry Moore is no longer a customer. Can you delete them from the crm?”, the GD agent tries to directly delete the customer by using their name as the customer_id parameter, rather than searching for their ID and then delet-ing. The guidelines for customer.delete_customer state to avoid directly deleting customers and en-sure that the customer ID is a valid value, not someone’s name. This result shows that self-exploration with an evaluation protocol can enable self-improvement. 

Error Handling of Parameter Formatting Af-fects Performance. However, we see that for τ -Bench, AG, and all other methods except for OD, achieved a low score with τ -Bench. A major con-tributing factor is the order_id parameter. The or-der_id parameter is in 7 out of 14 functions in τ -Bench, and requires a ‘#’ at the beginning of the value; otherwise, an error is returned. When the order_id is formatted incorrectly, the error message “Order not found”, shown in Figure 6, is mislead-ing to the agent and the self-improvement system because there is no indication that the missing “#” is the problem of the error. Some of the generated evaluations marked some of the function calls that used the ‘#’ as wrong. This error in evaluation then affects the summarized guidelines. In 2 trials, the guidelines would say to remove the ‘#’ formatting 18324 Figure 6: Failure of System Due to Misleading Error Messages. Incorrectly formatting the order_id parameter value for an order that does exist causes the τ -Bench function to return “Order does not exist”, misleading the LLM-based agent and LLM-based evaluator. 

from IDs. In τ -Bench, none of the generated docu-mentation methods (GD, UD, and RD) mention the formatting requirement either. Therefore, the only way to know that the “#” is required was by using the OD. We reran the AG (with DxD method before self-exploration) experiment. However, this time we hardcoded the following phrase in all the guide-lines for all functions that use order_id: “THERE NEEDS TO BE A ‘#’ AT THE START OF THE ORDER ID. THIS IS MANDATORY. FOR EXAM-PLE: “#W8732376” IS VALID, BUT “W8732376” IS NOT!!!!” This modification raises the aver-age success rate from 10% to 49% , and this result shows again that having specific, correct parameter information can significantly help the SR, and that robust and descriptive error handling of the API functions is imperative for reliable evaluation and summarization. 

DxD and DE have more advantages than the summarization methods. DxD and DE have con-sistently had a higher success rate over other I

and I′ methods. However, this can be attributed to data leakage. The set of tasks G for each environ-ment has many repeated formats, such as sending emails, canceling orders, or looking up information on cases. Thus, the train-test distributions are simi-lar. It would be interesting to try DxD and DE in environments that provide distinctive tasks that use the same APIs. 

Note on Increasing N . For DxD with τ -Bench and CRMArena, using the conversation history be-tween causes the LLM of the agent to exceed its maximum context length. We truncated the conver-sation history to at most the past three messages. This truncation allowed o3-mini to handle 5 and 

15 demonstrations per function for τ -Bench, and                                 

> Test-Time WorkBench (167 Tasks) τ-Bench (83 Tasks) Method IMethod Before Self-Exploration DxD GD DxD GD DE 44.71 32 .14 45 .00 44 .00
> UD 29 .20 28 .94 9.00 9.00
> RD 30 .34 28 .54 6.00 10 .00
> AG 42 .51 38 .92 10 .00 9.00
> DxD 44 .11 47 .00
> GD 30 .14 9.00
> GDEC 34 .73 41 .00
> OD 33 .33 78.00

Table 2: Results of gaining experience with training queries during self-exploration using o3-mini. We used 

N = 5 expert demonstrations per f for self-exploration. The methods on the bottom half of the table (DxD, GD, GDEC, OD) do not depend on self-exploration. All experiments ran across 3 trials, and all values reported are the mean success rate (%). Bolded values represent the highest success rate for a given dataset. 

5 per function for CRMArena. All other models could only handle 5 demonstrations per function. For GDEC, we noticed that for WorkBench and CRMArena, the agent will repeatedly call the same function, suggesting that the repeated N example calls teach the LLM agent to repeat. 

## 6 Additional Analysis and Results 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). To handle the context length issue seen with GPT-4o-mini, we provide an additional RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) experiment on τ -Bench using DxD. We em-bed the sampled N demonstrations with OpenAI text-embedding-3-small and retrieve the 5 most rel-evant demonstrations based on the current query with cosine similarity. This experiment is over 3

trials with the set of questions that use APIs with at least 35 demonstrations, same as in Table 1. Table 18325 3 shows no significant change in performance in number of demonstrations when using RAG.          

> OD 5 Dems 15 Dems 35 Dems
> (No RAG) (No RAG)
> 69 .08 42 .12 39 .13 44 .262
> Table 3: Mean success rate (%) across different demon-stration counts with RAG on τ-Bench.

DxD with Open-Source Models. We ran Mistral 8x7B and Qwen3 on three trials of WorkBench with OD, and DxD (with 5 Dems). The test tasks are the same set of questions from Table 1, where APIs needed have at least 35 demonstrations. In Table 4, Qwen3 achieves higher SR with DxD than with OD, and it outperforms all OpenAI models on WorkBench. We believe that this increase is due to the amount of prior reasoning it does before generating an action, and the similarity between the train and test split in WorkBench. 

I Method Qwen3 Mistral 8x7B 

DxD 5 Dems 67 .27 13 .28 

OD 54 .62 14 .56 

> Table 4: Comparing 5 DxD against OD with Qwen-3 and Mistral 8x7B on WorkBench.

## 7 Related Works 

Tool-based agents expand the capabilities of tra-ditional LLMs by connecting to external sources such as API functions, search engines, data cen-ters, etc., to complete multi-step queries. Multiple benchmarks have been proposed with various sets of API functions with documentation (Guo et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025; Styles et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Ar-cadinho et al., 2024). While generating documen-tation has been studied before the advent of LLMs (Wang et al., 2023; Nybom et al., 2018), there is little work on generating documentation for down-stream agent task planning. For documentation-free agents, ToolAlpaca by Tang et al. (2023) gen-erated documentation via an LLM given a brief description of the function from OpenAPI. API-DocBooster (Yang et al., 2023) used GPT-4 to pro-duce and update documentation based on search results from StackOverflow. Concurrent to this work, Fang et al. (2025) also used experiences of the agent to update the documentation. However, they still relied on initial documentation. Tool-former by Schick et al. (2023) finetuned their agent on API calls. Our work is the first to study how we can generate and update an agent’s understanding of functionality with expert demonstrations and ex-perience with a frozen LLM. We are also the first to use demonstrations directly into the LLM-based agent for functionality understanding. Our formal-ization is similar to Reinforcement Learning with parameterized action spaces (Masson et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2024) where the agent must choose an action from a discrete set (in our case, choose an f ∈ F ), and then must choose parameters spe-cific to the selected action, i.e. p ∈ dom (P (f )) .However, to our knowledge, previous literature as-sumes a single, continuous parameter per action. Our work relaxes this assumption as an API func-tion can allow for multiple parameters, continuous or discrete. 

## 8 Conclusion 

We provide and formalize the problem of earning of API functionality from in-context demonstrations with no prior documentation. We highlight the persisting and challenging problem of API-agent planning with limited information on the set of functions. We investigate tackling this problem by learning functionality, specifically function descrip-tion, return, and input parameters, from in-context demonstrations of tool calls. We analyze the num-ber of demonstrations, various processing methods, and the impact of self-exploration and LLM-based evaluation. Importantly, our extensive experiments highlight the difficulties of SoTA LLMs on this problem, specifically due to failures in describing the parameter schema, suggesting further research to improve results. 

## 9 Limitations and Further Work 

As we present this new challenge, we would like to highlight some limitations of this work. The heuristic mentioned in Section 4 when extracting expert demonstrations leads to suboptimal demon-strations. We do not focus on mitigating or filtering out these suboptimal demonstrations. One could also look at using an LLM-based evaluator to sig-nal what steps are correct. We do not consider it in this work, as we analyzed LLM-based evalua-tions during self-exploration. However, filtering out suboptimal demonstrations is an exciting and interesting direction to pursue. 18326 Furthermore, we iteratively generated docu-ments for each function independently. One in-teresting extension is to see the effect of group learning functions together. We see in τ -Bench that the order_id parameter was shared across mul-tiple functions, so the agent should only have to learn it correctly once. This sharing of parameter information could lead to more stable performance as the information between functions is more con-sistent. One could also extend this problem to the Model-Context Protocol (MCP), where the agent must rely on multiple data sources and sets of API functions. This direction is a more complex, realistic scenario than ours, as we only focus on a single set of data and APIs. Furthermore, human-in-the-loop setups where the user acts as an expert policy to extract online demonstrations could pave the way to in-corporate imitation learning algorithms, such as DAgger (Ross et al., 2011). 

## References 

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Siyu An, Qin Li, Junru Lu, Di Yin, and Xing Sun. 2024. Finverse: An autonomous agent system for versatile financial analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06379 .Samuel Arcadinho, David Aparicio, and Mariana Almeida. 2024. Automated test generation to evalu-ate tool-augmented llms as conversational ai agents. In Proceedings of the 2nd GenBench Workshop on Generalisation (Benchmarking) in NLP , pages 54– 68. Runnan Fang, Xiaobin Wang, Yuan Liang, Shuofei Qiao, Jialong Wu, Zekun Xi, Ningyu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. 2025. Synworld: Virtual scenario synthesis for agentic action knowledge refinement. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.03561. Sakharam Gawade, Shivam Akhouri, Chinmay Kulka-rni, Jagdish Samant, Pragya Sahu, Jai Pahal, Saswat Meher, et al. 2025. Multi agent based medi-cal assistant for edge devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05397 .Zhicheng Guo, Sijie Cheng, Hao Wang, Shihao Liang, Yujia Qin, Peng Li, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. 2024. Stabletoolbench: Towards stable large-scale benchmarking on tool learning of large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2403.07714. Kung-Hsiang Huang, Akshara Prabhakar, Sidharth Dhawan, Yixin Mao, Huan Wang, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Philippe Laban, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2025. Crmarena: Understanding the capacity of llm agents to perform professional crm tasks in real-istic environments. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) .Junaed Younus Khan, Md Tawkat Islam Khondaker, Gias Uddin, and Anindya Iqbal. 2021. Automatic de-tection of five api documentation smells: Practition-ers’ perspectives. In 2021 IEEE International Con-ference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengi-neering (SANER) , pages 318–329. IEEE. Junaed Younus Khan and Gias Uddin. 2022. Automatic code documentation generation using gpt-3. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Con-ference on Automated Software Engineering , pages 1–6. Woojeong Kim, Ashish Jagmohan, and Aditya Vempaty. 2024. Seal: Suite for evaluating api-use of llms. In 

NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Open-World Agents .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 33:9459–9474. Ruishi Li, Yunfei Yang, Jinghua Liu, Peiwei Hu, and Guozhu Meng. 2022. The inconsistency of documen-tation: a study of online c standard library documents. 

Cybersecurity , 5(1):14. Zuxin Liu, Thai Hoang, Jianguo Zhang, Ming Zhu, Tian Lan, Juntao Tan, Weiran Yao, Zhiwei Liu, Yi-hao Feng, Rithesh RN, et al. 2024. Apigen: Auto-mated pipeline for generating verifiable and diverse function-calling datasets. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 37:54463–54482. Warwick Masson, Pravesh Ranchod, and George Konidaris. 2016. Reinforcement learning with pa-rameterized actions. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 30. Kristian Nybom, Adnan Ashraf, and Ivan Porres. 2018. A systematic mapping study on api documentation generation approaches. In 2018 44th euromicro con-ference on software engineering and advanced appli-cations (SEAA) , pages 462–469. IEEE. Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. 2011. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Pro-ceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 627– 635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings. 18327 Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:68539–68551. Olly Styles, Sam Miller, Patricio Cerda-Mardini, Tanaya Guha, Victor Sanchez, and Bertie Vidgen. 2024. Workbench: a benchmark dataset for agents in a re-alistic workplace setting. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, Boxi Cao, and Le Sun. 2023. Toolalpaca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05301 .Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023. Llama: Open and effi-cient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 .Shujun Wang, Yongqiang Tian, and Dengcheng He. 2023. gdoc: Automatic generation of structured api documentation. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 , pages 53–56. Zilong Wang, Yuedong Cui, Li Zhong, Zimin Zhang, Da Yin, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Jingbo Shang. 2024. Officebench: Benchmarking language agents across multiple applications for office automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19056 .Frank F. Xu, Yufan Song, Boxuan Li, Yuxuan Tang, Kritanjali Jain, Mengxue Bao, Zora Z. Wang, Xuhui Zhou, Zhitong Guo, Murong Cao, Mingyang Yang, Hao Yang Lu, Amaad Martin, Zhe Su, Lean-der Maben, Raj Mehta, Wayne Chi, Lawrence Jang, Yiqing Xie, Shuyan Zhou, and Graham Neu-big. 2024. Theagentcompany: Benchmarking llm agents on consequential real world tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.14161. Chengran Yang, Jiakun Liu, Bowen Xu, Christoph Treude, Yunbo Lyu, Junda He, Ming Li, and David Lo. 2023. Apidocbooster: An extract-then-abstract framework leveraging large language models for augmenting api documentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10934 .Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 .Renhao Zhang, Haotian Fu, Yilin Miao, and George Konidaris. 2024. Model-based reinforcement learn-ing for parameterized action spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 58935– 58954. PMLR. Hao Zhong and Zhendong Su. 2013. Detecting api doc-umentation errors. ACM SIGPLAN Notices , 48:803– 816. 18328 A Train-Test Split 

Algorithm 1 details the process of how, for a given dataset, we divide the demonstrations of the API functions into the train and test sets. Because a task in a dataset could require different APIs, had we simply just split the demonstrations, which include task information, into train and test sets, data leakage would almost certainly occur. To ensure no tasks in the test sets were in the training sets, for each API function, we first divide the tasks from only the demonstrations of that function into train and test task sets. We then divide the demonstrations into training and test demonstration sets. For the next API function, if a task for that API has already been assigned to the train or test task set, we simply assign the demonstration to the corresponding set for demonstrations. The remaining tasks for the function that have not been seen will be split into the train and test task sets, and the process repeats for all functions. 

Algorithm 1 Train-Test Split 

Input: List of API functions A, dictionary of demonstrations D, test split percentage p, random seed s

Initialize: List of training tasks Ttrain = []; list of test tasks Ttrain Dictionary of training demonstrations 

Dtrain = , Dictionary of training demonstrations Dtest =

for a in A do 

T aremaining = {} ▷ See which tasks of a have not been assigned to either train or test 

for d in D[a] do ▷ D [a] is the list of demonstrations for at = d[T ask ] ▷ Get the task that the demonstration is for 

if t in Ttrain then 

Add d to list Dtrain [a]

else if t in Ttest then 

Add d to list Dtest [a]

else 

Add t to list Tremaining Y a 

end if end for 

Set random state to seed s ▷ We now split the tasks that have not been assigned yet 

num test = len (T aremaining ) ∗ pT atest = random n subset of T aremaining 

T atrain = T aremaining − T atest 

for d in D[a] do 

t = d[T ask ]

if t in T atrain then 

Add d to Dtrain [a]

else 

Add d to Dtest [a]

end if end for 

Add elements of T atrain to Ttrain 

Add elements of T atest to Ttest 

end for 

## B AI Writing Tools 

We used LLM services such as ChatGPT and Perplexity for feedback and editing of this document. 

## C Dataset Statistics and Specifications 

WorkBench. To extract the expert demonstrations, we take their pre-computed predictions for all queries and then run their evaluation script. From there, we have access to the prediction of their GPT-4 agent that used the original documentation. The prediction is used as the demonstration trajectory. For each 18329 Function from WorkBench No. of Demonstrations analytics.create_plot 152 

analytics.engaged_users_count 46 

analytics.get_average_session_duration 33 

analytics.total_visits_count 28 

analytics.traffic_source_count 2

calendar.create_event 93 

calendar.delete_event 118 

calendar.search_events 85 

calendar.update_event 52 

company_directory.find_email_address 67 

customer_relationship_manager.add_customer 25 

customer_relationship_manager.delete_customer 175 

customer_relationship_manager.search_customers 13 

customer_relationship_manager.update_customer 133 

email.delete_email 44 

email.forward_email 67 

email.reply_email 31 

email.search_emails 62 

email.send_email 108 

project_management.create_task 78 

project_management.search_tasks 34 

project_management.update_task 96 

> Table 5: WorkBench functions and Number of Expert Demonstrations

function call of prediction, we format a demonstration as shown in Figure 1. Because WorkBench is outcome-centric, the ground-truth will contain fewer steps than needed to properly complete the task. The only functions that are included affect the environment. For example, sending an email to someone, a task that involves finding the email address, will only have the search_email function in the ground-truth. All functions that search for events, customers, emails, etc., or analyze data like analytics.get_average_session will not appear. Some queries will have ground truths with 0 steps. These are for queries where the required condition before performing an environment-changing action is not satisfied. For example, the agent needs to set up a meeting only if the last meeting was over a week ago, and the last meeting was the day before. Then, the ground truth is 0 steps. However, the agent should execute the search_events function before deciding not to set up an email. For this reason, we use the pre-computed trajectories provided by (Styles et al., 2024) with a GPT-4 powered agent with ground-truth documentation. We only extract demonstrations from successful trajectories. This heuristic, as previously mentioned in Section 4, can lead to wrong demonstrations in the set of expert demonstrations. Table 5 provides the number of expert demonstrations we extracted from the pre-computed trajectory. 

τ -Bench and CRMArena. Both τ -Bench and CRMArena have their results stored as JSON objects. Each task attempted stores a sequence of tool calls and accompanying tool executions. Each pair of tool calls and tool executions is turned into the demonstration data, where we can also extract the Return value from the tool execution to add to the expert demonstrations. While τ -Bench does provide ground-truth function calls for the tasks, it disregards the interaction with the simulated user. Seeing examples of these interactions is important for the agent to understand when to use tools, relating to parameter filling. We thus do not use the ground-truth answers and rather use the pre-computed trajectories from the dataset as expert demonstrations. Figure 14 shows generated guidelines that specify, in green, that the agent should confirm the input parameters of the address details with the user. 18330 Function from τ -Bench No. of Demonstrations calculate 36 

cancel_pending_order 129 

exchange_delivered_order_items 133 

find_user_id_by_email 245 

find_user_id_by_name_zip 320 

get_order_details 871 

get_product_details 340 

get_user_details 279 

list_all_product_types 74 

modify_pending_order_address 43 

modify_pending_order_items 146 

modify_pending_order_payment 12 

modify_user_address 16 

return_delivered_order_items 140   

> Table 6: τ-Bench functions and Number of Expert Demonstrations

Function from CRMArena No. of Demonstrations calculate_average_handle_time 62 

calculate_region_average_closure_times 114 

find_id_with_max_value 175 

find_id_with_min_value 144 

get_account_id_by_contact_id 63 

get_agent_handled_cases_by_period 136 

get_agent_transferred_cases_by_period 97 

get_agents_with_max_cases 113 

get_agents_with_min_cases 32 

get_cases 421 

get_email_messages_by_case_id 53 

get_issue_counts 166 

get_issues 83 

get_livechat_transcript_by_case_id 53 

get_month_to_case_count 38 

get_non_transferred_case_ids 59 

get_order_item_ids_by_product 304 

get_period 290 

get_purchase_history 172 

get_qualified_agent_ids_by_case_count 218 

get_shipping_state 82 

get_start_date 240 

search_knowledge_articles 114 

search_products 195 

> Table 7: CRMArena functions and Number of Expert Demonstrations

18331 D Self-Exploration Pipeline 

Figure 7 visualizes the process of updating the agent’s initial learning from in-context demonstrations via self-exploration. 

Figure 7: Overview of Self-Exploration Pipeline. Visualizes is the three-step process of updating functionality understanding with experience. In the first step, the agent performs self-exploration with the training queries in the sandbox environment, collecting experiences. The agent can use any method I to initially learn functionality from expert demonstrations. In the second step, each experience is then evaluated via an LLM-based evaluator. Finally, we present four different options to update the agent’s understanding of functionality with the original expert demonstrations and the new experience-based demonstrations. The updated understanding is then passed into the agent for test queries. 18332 E System Prompts 

Figure 8: System Prompt of document generator 18333 Figure 9: System Prompt of documentation updater given initial generated document and experiences 18334 Figure 10: System Prompt of evaluator that critiques an experience during self-exploration 

Figure 11: System Prompt that summarizes experiences and evaluations to generate guidelines 

Figure 12: GPT-4o Generated Document of analytics.create_plot with 10 demonstrations before we explicitly stated in the user prompt what the input parameters should be. GPT-4o hallucinates a ‘data’ input parameter that does not exist in the implementation. 18335 Figure 13: Mistral Generated Document of analytics.create_plot with 5 demonstrations. It has no parameter information. 

Figure 14: Generated guidelines for the modify_pending_order_items function in τ -Bench 18336