Fulcrum.AI
TRACING THE EVOLUTION OF ORACLE BONE CHARAC-
TERS ACROSS THREE MILLENNIA
Tianhao Fu1,∗
Xinxin Xu2,∗
Spike Wang1 Cunyi Kang3
Jian Cao2
Xixin Cao2
1Fulcrum.AI
2Peking University
3Independent
ABSTRACT
Of the approximately 4,500 Oracle Bone Inscription (OBI) characters discovered
from the Shang dynasty, only about 1,600 have been deciphered. Many com-
putational approaches compare OBI with glyphs from one historical period at a
time. However, during the evolution of Chinese characters, significant structural
or semantic changes often occur in uncertain dynasties. A single-period reference
may be insufficient when relevant forms change substantially between observed
eras. Therefore, we propose the Manifold-based Script Evolution Framework
(MSEF), a framework that models the evolution series (OBI, Bronze, Seal, Cleri-
cal, Regular) of Chinese characters as the continual evolution of a manifold space.
MSEF represents each character as an era-specific manifold point and learns con-
tinuous inter-era transition rules via Neural Ordinary Differential Equations. Both
manifold space and transition dynamics can be trained end-to-end through character
evolution pairs across any two eras. To support this training scheme, the manuscript
describes FGCCES as a cross-era dataset with fine-grained temporal and regional
metadata. The current public release contains only the CCAMC source corpus;
FGCCES-derived annotations, features, and experiment splits are not included.
Based on MSEF, we propose the Cascaded Bidirectional Evolutionary Decipher-
ment (CBED) algorithm, where forward predictions recall potential candidates
and backward consistency checking filters false matches, intended to reduce errors
that can arise from single-period comparisons. To ground our approach, we provide
a pre-exploratory diagnosis of existing generative and retrieval paradigms, show-
ing why continuous manifold dynamics are well suited for fragmented cross-era
script data. We further conduct mechanistic post-analysis, showing that the learned
representations and transition dynamics capture patterns consistent with known
paleographic transformations. The reported experiments cover three benchmarks
and the manuscript-described FGCCES evaluation. Some benchmark adapters,
aggregate calculations, split artifacts, and significance tests remain unverified; the
reported scores should therefore be read within those limits. This work opens
the possibility of using continuous manifold dynamics in cross-era paleographic
decipherment. Project page: https://fulcrum-xai.github.io/.
1
INTRODUCTION
Oracle Bone Inscription (OBI) is an important source for studying early Chinese writing and Shang
history (Keightley, 1985). Chinese characters evolve over three millennia from Shang dynasty
OBI, through Zhou dynasty Bronze Inscriptions, Qin dynasty Seal Script, Han dynasty Clerical
Script, to modern Regular Script. Figure 1 illustrates the evolution process. Among the approxi-
mately 4,500 OBI characters discovered, only about 1,600 (35.6%) have been deciphered (Keightley,
1985; Li et al., 2020). Deciphering the remaining ∼2,900 characters would unlock invaluable in-
sights into early Chinese civilization (Wang & Deng, 2024), yet this process often takes years per
character due to the need to thoroughly examine structural features and semantic patterns across
different eras. The emergence of AI technologies presents a novel frontier for OBI deciphering.
Current approaches generally fall into two categories: (1) compare OBI with modern simplified
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
1
arXiv:2609.35674v1  [cs.CL]  28 Sep 2026


Fulcrum.AI
Chinese by image retrieval (Meng et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2024) or generate modern simplified Chi-
nese (Chang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023c), sometimes incorporating semantic information (Chen
et al., 2024); and (2) compare OBI with other historical scripts such as Bronze (Wu et al., 2025).
Evolution-Based
      (OBSD)
Retrieval-Based
   (CrossFont)
Fine-grained-Based (MSEF)
Utilizing Intermediate Dynasties
Omitting Intermediate Dynasties
History Era
OBI
Bronze
Seal
Regular
Clerical
Li group
Bin group
No group
        
Western Zhou
      
Western Zhou
         
Western Zhou
        
Warring States
Han Dynasty
Modern
Middle
Late
Middle
Early
Qin Jian
Chu Jian
OBI
Regular
Regular
OBI
Bronze
Seal
Omitting Evolution
Figure 1: Evolution of Chinese script. Taking the character “Ox” as an
example, this figure demonstrates the evolution of Chinese characters
across five historical periods. This character underwent a significant
morphological change in early bronze script, then later reverted to a
form similar to its oracle bone appearance. A method restricted to
bronze forms could assign low similarity to this particular pair. The
example motivates evaluating evidence across multiple periods, though
it does not by itself establish an error rate for single-period methods.
The first type attempts di-
rect mappings from OBI-
to-modern, ignoring critical
intermediate stages (Guo
et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2023b).
Such mappings may be
challenged when relevant
forms change substantially
between observed eras. The
second
type,
while
in-
corporating multi-era com-
parisons, treats historical
scripts as independent static
sets. For instance, Cross-
Font (Wu et al., 2025) pro-
cesses multi-era data but
does not explicitly model
temporal dynamics, which
may limit retrieval when
glyph forms change sub-
stantially between the peri-
ods being compared. Char-
acter lineages may end be-
fore later periods. Methods that require candidates at every period may therefore compare against
forms with no surviving lineage. MSEF includes a survival component intended to estimate when a
candidate path should terminate; its empirical calibration is not established by the reported results
(Appendix V). This motivates evaluating methods that use evidence from multiple periods when
it is available, while accounting for missing or terminated character lineages. So we propose the
Manifold-based Script Evolution Framework (MSEF) (Bottéro, 1996; Meil˘a & Zhang, 2024),
modeling character evolution as continuous flow through a shared manifold space directly. Specifi-
cally, (1) under MSEF, each historical period defines an era-conditioned representation in a shared
high-dimensional coordinate space, where each observed glyph corresponds to a point. Inter-period
transitions are governed by continuous, invertible Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural
ODE) (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019). (2) We implement the manifold using a time-
conditioned transformer mapping feature vectors to coordinates, with a spectrally-normalized network
for the ODE ensuring continuous transitions. (3) Furthermore, we additionally introduce a survival
network that predicts character extinction probability across dynasties. To support MSEF training,
we construct a fine-grained dataset containing complete and partial evolution chains and their
available pairwise correspondences. Based on trained MSEF, we propose Cascaded Bidirectional
Evolutionary Decipherment (CBED), which performs forward cascade retrieval with a survival
mechanism to terminate extinct paths, followed by backward verification via inverse ODE flows with
step-wise pruning for evolutionary consistency. The final architecture proposed in this paper is the
culmination of systematic theoretical derivation and experimental exploration. In our pre-exploratory
analysis (Appendix C), we delineate this research trajectory: First, we systematically diagnose
existing generative and retrieval paradigms, revealing failure modes associated with not explicitly
modeling intermediate stages of script evolution. Second, we return to first principles to model the
labeled evolution chains as a duality of a shared correspondence identity and a variant visual surface
across historical periods. Third, we conduct a quantitative analysis to identify distinct morphological
evolution clusters, empirically mapping baseline vulnerabilities to non-monotone and abrupt historical
transitions. Finally, we examine alternative solutions, examining the performance of incremental
patches and the design of discrete rule-based alternatives. These diagnostic findings motivate our
proposed MSEF powered by Neural ODEs. The manuscript reports quantitative evaluations of
MSEF, the fully trained model inherently presents as a complex black box. To better understand its
underlying mechanisms and to examine the model’s reported behavior, we conduct a mechanistic
post-analysis (Appendix D). Our framework design centers on several critical components, notably
2


Fulcrum.AI
the continuous manifold character representations, the Neural ODE inter-era transition dynamics, and
the survival net. By employing mechanistic interpretability visualizations, including causal saliency
maps and attention circuit diagrams, we conduct fine-grained analyses on each of these modules.
These analyses characterize information-routing patterns and morphodynamic regularities consistent
with known paleographic transformations; they do not independently exclude memorization. Our
contributions are:
• We propose a Manifold-based Script Evolution Framework (MSEF) which could model the evolu-
tion series (OBI, Bronze, Seal, Clerical, Regular) of Chinese characters as the continual evolution
of a manifold space. Such a framework contains a manifold net for representing the period, Neural
ODE for representing inter-period transitions, and survival net for representing character survival
across periods.
• We describe FGCCES as a fine-grained cross-era dataset. The current public repository contains
the CCAMC source corpus only; FGCCES-derived correspondences, annotations, features, and
experiment splits are not included.
• We introduce a Cascaded Bidirectional Evolutionary Decipherment (CBED) mechanism that
employs forward cascaded retrieval with backward verification, providing temporal consistency
validation. The mechanism is intended to use intermediate-era evidence when available; its
empirical benefit requires verified matched evaluations.
• The manuscript reports experiments on three benchmarks and the FGCCES evaluation, but un-
resolved split, adapter, aggregation, and comparison evidence limit comparative conclusions
(Appendix V).
2
MANIFOLD-BASED SCRIPT EVOLUTION FRAMEWORK (MSEF)
In this section, we describe the proposed MSEF and corresponding CBED. We first present our
observation and intuition of the Chinese character evolution in Section 2.1, and then introduce the
theoretical form of the evolution of Chinese characters in Section 2.2, which unifies distinct historical
eras into a single evolving manifold governed by differential equations. After that, we introduce how
we implement and train such a mathematical model in Sections 2.3 and 2.4. Finally, by learning the
vector field of character evolution, MSEF allows us to project ancient scripts forward to predict their
modern counterparts and trace modern characters backward to verify their origins. Such a CBED
algorithm is illustrated in Section 2.5.
2.1
INTUITION: SCRIPT EVOLUTION AS CONTINUOUS FLOW
Figure 2 visualizes the continuous evolution using “ox” as an example. Tracing the evolution from the
OBI to the Regular, we observe that despite drastic stylistic shifts, the character retains recognizable
structural components. In such a situation, we must apply temporal modeling to textual evolution to
capture these uncertain shifts, thereby enhancing decoding accuracy. More cases of these uncertain
change patterns are provided in Appendix P. We model this dynamic evolution process as a continuous
flow through a shared geometric space. All characters are points in a high-dimensional manifold M.
As time progresses, each point moves along a smooth trajectory governed by learnable dynamics.
This allows us to trace any ancient character forward to find its modern correspondent and trace
backward to verify consistency. To handle distinct representational vocabularies of different eras, we
assign each era a distinct manifold space Mt connected by continuous transitions.
2.2
MANIFOLD-BASED SCRIPT EVOLUTION FRAMEWORK THEORY
Building on the intuition above, we now formalize our framework. We establish three foundational
assumptions. Assumption 1 (Shared Manifold Space). All scripts across eras share an underlying
d-dimensional manifold (M, t), where d captures the essential dimensionality of character semantics
and structure, and t denotes the different dynasties. We empirically examine this geometric structure
in Appendix Q, where visualizing local neighborhoods reveals distinct clusters of visually and
semantically related characters. Assumption 2 (Continuous Manifold Transition Dynamics).
Character evolution follows continuous dynamics governed by a velocity field. Let z(t) ∈Rd denote
the coordinates of a character’s manifold in normalized time t ∈[0, 1] (with OBI times in [0, 0.30)
3


Fulcrum.AI
Bronze
Seal
Regular
OBI
Clerical
牛
王
羊
午
牟
Manifold_1
t∈[0, 0.3)
Time：
Manifold_2
Manifold_3
Manifold_4
Manifold_5
...
...
...
...
OBI
Bronze
Seal
Clerical
Regular
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Similarity
(feature1,feature2)
...
...
Candidate Vectors
Forward cascade
Backward verification
Match
Mismatch
trajectory
Feature
Extractor
    Filter out
low similarity
...
Matched Vectors
All Candidates
True Matches
Forward
t∈[0.3, 0.7)
t∈[0.7, 0.85)
t∈[0.85, 1)
t = 1
Backward
Timeline of Chinese script evolution
Cascaded bidirectional decipherment
Figure 2: Overview of MSEF. Top: Continuous Manifold Evolution. The framework models
the 3,000-year evolution of Chinese script as a continuous trajectory (red line) through era-specific
manifolds Mt, conditioned on normalized time t (from OBI t = 0.0 to Regular t = 1.0). The
intervals of t define an ordered model-time coordinate; their lengths are not proportional to calendar-
year durations. Neural ODEs govern the continuous transitions via forward flows ϕ and backward
flows ψ. Specifically, each historical period manifold is represented in a shared high-dimensional
coordinate space, where each observed glyph corresponds to a point. Inter-period point transitions are
governed by the continuous neural ODE. Such a framework enables us to derive candidate character
solutions for any dynasty within the character manifold space by leveraging any given dynasty.
This facilitates the design of subsequent bidirectional cascading decryption algorithms. Bottom:
Cascaded Bidirectional Decipherment. The inference process consists of two stages: (1) Forward
Recall: Given an OBI query, the model progressively infers its coordinate in subsequent eras (Bronze
→Seal →Clerical →Regular) to retrieve candidate sets. (2) Backward Verification: Candidates
from the modern era are traced back through history via inverse flows. At each reverse transition,
candidates showing large reconstruction errors (marked with ✗) are pruned step-by-step. The final
decipherment is determined by the backward compatibility with the original OBI encoding.
and t = 1 for Regular). The evolution is described by:
dz
dt = v(z, t; θ)
(1)
where v is a learnable velocity field parameterized by θ. This equation implies that the rate of a
character’s transformation is determined by both its current position in the manifold and the specific
historical era. Assumption 3 (Survival Probability). Some characters became obsolete over time.
We model the survival probability s(z, t) ∈[0, 1] as a learnable function. Flow Operators. Let za(u)
solve Equation 1 with za(t1) = a, and let zb(u) solve it backward with zb(t2) = b. We define:
ϕt1→t2(a) = a +
Z t2
t1
v(za(u), u) du,
(2)
ψt2→t1(b) = b −
Z t2
t1
v(zb(u), u) du.
(3)
The forward flow ϕ traces a character forward in time, while the backward flow ψ traces it backward.
Under the regularity assumptions in Appendix I, the exact flows are inverses: ψt2→t1 = ϕ−1
t1→t2. This
latent-space invertibility enables bidirectional verification. Time Encoding. We assign ordered model-
4


Fulcrum.AI
Table 1: Time encoding for historical periods. Subperiod details are provided in Appendix K.
Period
Time t
Historical Date
OBI
0.00–0.30
c. 1200–1050 BCE
Bronze
0.30–0.70
c. 1050–250 BCE
Seal
0.70–0.85
c. 220 BCE
Clerical
0.85–1.00
c. 200 CE
Regular
1.00
c. 600 CE–present
time intervals to historical periods: OBI (t = 0.00–0.30, with fine-grained scribal-group metadata),
Bronze (t = 0.30–0.70), Seal (t = 0.70–0.85), Clerical (t = 0.85–1.00), Regular (t = 1.00). Table 1
provides details. Fine-grained assignments must follow the record-to-time convention in Appendix K,
rather than treating every scribal-group label as an equally spaced chronological period.
2.3
MANIFOLD-BASED SCRIPT EVOLUTION FRAMEWORK NEURAL IMPLEMENTATION
Our framework comprises three interconnected neural components: a manifold encoder, a velocity
field network, and a survival prediction network. Input Representation. For each character c
in dynasty t, we extract a 352-dimensional feature vector xt
c ∈R352 specifically designed for
paleographic analysis. This representation aggregates five complementary modalities: Visual,
Structural, Semantic, Contextual, and Spatiotemporal. Detailed definitions of characteristics and
aggregation mechanisms are provided in the Appendix L. Manifold Encoder. Manifold mapping
M(xt
c, t) projects the input feature vector into a learned high-dimensional manifold space. We
implement this encoder as a 12-layer transformer that maps the 352-dimensional input to coordinates
zt
c ∈Rd with the manifold dimension d = 256. Velocity Field. The velocity network v(z, t)
models the temporal dynamics on the manifold. Given the manifold coordinates zt
c of character c
in dynasty t, solving the Neural ODE yields the predicted representation eztj
c = ϕt→tj(zt
c) at a later
observation time tj. We parameterize the velocity field as a 3-layer MLP with spectral normalization
and Tanh activations to ensure Lipschitz continuity. Survival Network. The survival network S(z0
c, t)
predicts the probabilities of character extinction. It takes as input the representation of the oracle
bone period manifold z0
c along with a target dynasty t, and outputs the probability that character c
becomes extinct by the dynasty t. This component is implemented as an MLP. We write its extinction
output as e(z0
c, t) = S(z0
c, t) and the corresponding survival probability as s = 1 −e. Continuous
Time Encoding. To enable the Neural ODE to capture the authentic continuous dynamics of script
evolution, we implement an ordered stochastic interval sampling scheme for the temporal variable
t. During training, for any given character feature xt
c ∈R352, the corresponding dynasty t is not
treated as a fixed scalar but is randomly sampled from its era-specific interval defined in Table 1.
Crucially, when processing evolution pairs or chains, we enforce a strict monotonicity constraint
t1 < t2 < · · · < t5 within the range [0, 1], with Regular script fixed at t = 1. This strategy ensures
that the temporal input t functions as a continuous variable during the optimization process. By
supervising the model across these dense stochastic intervals, we train the Neural ODE to learn
a smooth, time-dependent velocity field v(z, t) that generalizes the character transformation as a
continuous flow through the manifold space, rather than a sequence of discrete, independent mappings
between eras.
2.4
MANIFOLD-BASED SCRIPT EVOLUTION FRAMEWORK TRAINING
We train MSEF in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, for a given character, we obtain its correspond-
ing tuples across different dynasties. Based on these data, we optimize our three neural components
by minimizing the differences between the characters’ transformations between two dynasties. Ideally,
the high-dimensional feature of a character transformed from dynasty t to dynasty t′ should match
the high-dimensional feature of that character directly computed for dynasty t′. Let P denote the
available supervised cross-era pairs:
P = Padj ∪Pskip.
(4)
Complete chains are recorded separately, rather than added to a pair count. The counting units are
specified in Appendix H.
5


Fulcrum.AI
2.4.1
MULTI-SCALE LOSS FUNCTIONS
We train the MSEF using five complementary loss functions to ensure both local continuity and global
consistency. Adjacent-Era Loss enforces local evolution between consecutive periods. Cross-Era
Loss captures mid-range patterns for non-adjacent pairs. Full-Chain Loss prevents drift over the
complete trajectory. Cycle Consistency Loss measures numerical round-trip consistency (Zhu et al.,
2017); exact invertibility follows from the flow assumptions. Finally, Survival Loss trains the
extinction predictor using binary cross-entropy to distinguish between existing and extinct characters.
The total objective is:
Levolution = λ1Ladj + λ2Lskip + λ3Lfull + λ4Lcyc,
Lsurv = BCE(s(z0
c, t), yc,t).
(5)
Detailed definitions of each loss term are provided in Appendix F.
2.4.2
OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY
We adopt a decoupled training approach to ensure optimization stability. The manifold mapping
networks and Neural ODE dynamics are trained end-to-end with Levolution in Equation 5. The
extinction predictor has a separate objective Lsurv. Only examples providing an OBI representation
and a specified survival label contribute to the survival objective; an arbitrary cross-era pair does not
supply such supervision.
2.5
CASCADED BIDIRECTIONAL EVOLUTIONAL DECIPHERMENT WITH MANIFOLD-BASED
FRAMEWORK
With the trained MSEF model, we perform character decipherment through a bidirectional retrieval-
and-verification strategy. Given an undeciphered OBI, we encode it into the manifold space and
solve the Neural ODE to obtain its representation in the bronze script space. We retrieve the top-k
most similar bronze characters, then repeat this process through subsequent dynasties. All retrieved
characters form a candidate set. For each candidate in later scripts, we map it back to earlier script
spaces and compute similarity with existing candidates. Those with low similarity are discarded.
The final decipherment result consists of candidates that pass both forward and backward checks.
Detailed pseudocode is provided in Appendix G.
2.5.1
FORWARD RETRIEVAL VIA CROSS-ERA PROJECTION.
Given an OBI query with aggregated feature vector Xq, we utilize the shared network to infer its
representation in subsequent eras. Instead of a single jump, we perform a progressive cascade. We
first encode the query at its assigned OBI time t0: zq
t0 = M(Xq, t0; θ). For each later checkpoint tk,
we solve the learned dynamics:
zq
tk = ϕtk−1→tk(zq
tk−1)
(6)
We then retrieve the top-candidates from the database Dtk by mapping them to the same space.
Specifically, for a candidate character c in the era tk with aggregated feature Xc, we compute its
coordinate zc
tk = M(Xc, tk; θ) and calculate the similarity with zq
tk. This forward pass generates
a candidate set CRegular of modern characters that are plausible descendants of the OBI query.
We restrict the survival check to transitions tOBI →tSeal. For eras t > tSeal, no additional
survival-based rejection is applied; cumulative survival is not reset to one.
2.5.2
BACKWARD VERIFICATION VIA STEP-WISE PRUNING.
To account for the one-to-many nature of Chinese character correspondences, CBED uses set-valued
candidate retrieval and bidirectional reachability. This discrete retrieval relation need not be bijective.
It is distinct from the invertibility of the latent ODE flow under the assumptions in Appendix I. To
verify a candidate c ∈CRegular, we reverse the cascade process using a stepwise pruning strategy.
We trace the candidate through history by tRegular →tClerical →· · · →tOBI. At each backward
transition ti+1 →ti, we apply the inverse flow operator to the candidate’s coordinate:
ˆzti = ψti+1→ti(ˆzti+1)
(7)
We then compare this backward-projected point ˆzti with the candidate’s actual prototype embedding
obtained via M(Xc
ti, ti; θ) in the era ti. Candidate paths that exceed a divergence threshold ϵt are
6


Fulcrum.AI
Table 2: Single-round decipherment on HUST-OBS and EVOBC. We follow Guan et al. (2024)’s
protocol. The scores are reported under the cited protocol; adapters and information-matched
comparisons are not independently verified.
Eval.
Metric Pix2Pix CycleGAN BBDM CDE OBSD MSEF
OBS-OCR
Top-1
0.0
0.0
19.5
31.0
41.0
71.5
OBS-OCR Top-10
0.0
0.0
29.5
47.5
50.5
82.0
OBS-OCR Top-20
0.0
0.0
34.5
50.0
54.5
84.5
OBS-OCR Top-50
4.5
8.5
39.0
52.5
58.0
86.5
OBS-OCR Top-100
13.0
19.0
42.0
56.0
61.0
88.0
OBS-OCR Top-200
20.0
37.5
46.0
59.5
62.5
89.0
OBS-OCR Top-500
21.5
60.0
58.0
64.0
64.5
90.0
Paddle
Top-1
0.0
0.0
7.0
19.0
30.0
58.5
pruned. Checks use available intermediate prototypes; missing glyph observations are skipped, not
replaced by zero vectors. Finally, for candidates that survive the pruning process back to the OBI
era, we compute the cosine similarity between their final projected coordinate ˆzOBI and the query’s
observed embedding zq
OBI = M(Xq, tOBI; θ). The candidate with the highest valid-path cosine
similarity is selected as the final deciphering result, following the aggregation rule in Appendix G.
Algorithm 1 provides the detailed steps. The algorithm covers all five script periods and returns an
abstention when no candidate path passes verification. To illustrate this mechanism, we return to
the “ox” example. As shown in Figure 2, when the forward cascade retrieves candidates such as “牛”
(correct), “午” (visually similar), and “牟” (semantically related), the backward verification becomes
critical. By projecting these candidates back to the OBI manifold, the model predicts their ancient
latent representations. The backward representation of “牛” is consistent with the query’s encoding,
whereas “午” and “牟” result in significant reconstruction errors in the latent comparison. This
comparison allows the system to filter out false positives that survive the forward pass, effectively
enforcing evolutionary consistency.
3
EXPERIMENTS
We conducted extensive experiments to answer three research questions: RQ1: What benchmark
scores does the manuscript report for MSEF, and what limits their interpretation? RQ2: What is the
contribution of each component? RQ3: What interpretability analyses and expert-evaluation results
does the manuscript report, and what evidence is available to assess them?
3.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Dataset. The manuscript identifies FGCCES as its training resource; its final manifest and
split files are unavailable for verification and are not included in the public release. Unlike prior
works that rely on a single representative glyph per era, we describe FGCCES as having fine-grained
temporal and regional metadata; see Appendix R for examples. The paper does not claim priority
over earlier cross-era resources such as EVOBC. Specifically, our dataset includes:
1. Character images corresponding to each dynastic period for every character. 2. Excavation
information related to each character. 3. Definitions for each deciphered character. The manuscript
identifies jgwlbq, CCAMC, and BNU as sources, with coverage varying across characters and periods.
Under the stated feature convention, unavailable feature components may be zero-filled; missing
glyph observations are not synthesized and are skipped by CBED when no prototype is available. The
manuscript reports 1,358 character categories and an intended character-disjoint train/validation/test
protocol. The final FGCCES manifest, split counts, and overlap audit are unavailable for verification,
and the FGCCES artifacts are not in the public repository (Appendix H).
Baselines. We compare against methods spanning three categories: (1) Image-to-image translation:
Pix2Pix (Isola et al., 2017), CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017), DRIT++ (Lee et al., 2019), Palette
(Saharia et al., 2022a), BBDM (Li et al., 2023a), CDE (Saharia et al., 2022b); (2) OBI-specific
generative models: Sundial-GAN (Chang et al., 2022), OBSD (Guan et al., 2024), Diff-Oracle (Li
7


Fulcrum.AI
Table 3: Results on PictOBI-20k. MSEF subgroup and overall scores are reported; the aggregation is
not verified as a common-population average.
Model
Params
Normal
Complex
Overall
Random (4-choice)
—
25.00
25.00
25.00
GPT-4o-2024-11-20
—
26.31
25.52
26.23
Gemini 2.5 Pro
—
55.22
39.44
53.66
Claude 4 Sonnet
—
35.93
25.92
34.94
GLM-4.5V-106B
106B
33.19
27.11
32.48
Qwen2.5-VL-72B
72B
25.41
24.98
25.36
InternVL3-78B
78B
52.29
36.38
50.71
InternVL3-38B
38B
52.71
39.51
51.40
MSEF (Ours)
140M
74.82
53.24
72.18
Table 4: Reported FGCCES score summaries. Run-level records and significance tests are unavailable
for independent verification.
Method
R@1
R@5
R@10
R@1%
AP
Diff-Oracle (2023)
52.1±1.3 68.9±1.6 77.4±1.2 85.2±1.0 0.56
OracleFusion (2025) 58.3±1.2 74.5±1.3 81.2±1.1 88.1±0.9 0.62
CrossFont (2025)
54.6±1.4 70.8±1.4 78.5±1.2 86.5±1.0 0.58
OracleSage (2024)
60.1±1.1 76.2±1.2 82.8±1.0 89.5±0.8 0.64
OracleAgent (2025)
62.8±1.0 77.9±1.1 84.6±0.9 90.8±0.7 0.67
MSEF (Ours)
72.5±0.8 86.5±0.6 91.8±0.5 95.6±0.4 0.78
et al., 2023c), OracleFusion (Li et al., 2025b); and (3) Cross-modal methods: CrossFont (Wu et al.,
2025), OracleSage (Jiang et al., 2024), OracleAgent (Li et al., 2025a). For methods without public
code, the manuscript reports paper-based reimplementations and cites Paper2Code as a reference
where applicable (Seo et al., 2025). Reproduction logs, hyperparameter parity, output adapters, and
split parity are not sufficiently documented to verify exact equivalence. Appendix O.10 describes
the reported Neural ODE and diffusion-based probability-flow ODE comparison; its implementation
and evaluation parity remain unverified. Metrics. Following (Wu et al., 2025; Guan et al., 2024), we
employ: (1) Top-K accuracy for generation-based evaluation (K ∈{1, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500}); (2)
Recall@K and Average Precision (AP) for retrieval tasks; (3) Multi-choice accuracy for PictOBI-20k.
Implementation Details. For ODE integration, we use the dopri5 solver with tolerances of 10−5.
Training uses AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with learning rate 10−4, batch size 256, for 100
epochs (∼18 hours on 2 NVIDIA H100 GPUs). We report mean±std across 5 runs.
3.2
MAIN RESULTS (RQ1)
Results on HUST-OBS and EVOBC Benchmarks. Following Guan et al. (2024), we evaluate
using OBS-OCR and PaddleOCR. Table 2 presents single-round decipherment results. The table
reports MSEF at 71.5% Top-1 accuracy on OBS-OCR, an arithmetic difference from OBSD of
30.5 percentage points. The output adapter and information-matched protocol are not documented
sufficiently for verification, so these values are reported without claiming a confirmed method
advantage. Multi-round decipherment results are shown in Appendix O.1. Comparison with LMMs
on PictOBI-20k. Table 3 compares MSEF with the seven displayed LMM baselines on PictOBI-
20k’s 4-choice visual decipherment task (Chen et al., 2025). The manuscript reports 74.82% on
Normal cases and 53.24% on Complex cases for the 140M model, with 72.18% overall. The subgroup
denominators and aggregation rule do not reconcile with the displayed LMM summaries; 72.18%
is therefore not treated as a verified common-population aggregate or a confirmed head-to-head
advantage. Reported FGCCES Benchmark Summaries. Table 4 reproduces reported retrieval
scores for the manuscript-described FGCCES-Test and specialized methods (2023–2025). The table
reports 72.5% Recall@1 for MSEF and 62.8% for OracleAgent, an arithmetic difference of 9.7
points. The final FGCCES split artifact, candidate sets, and statistical comparison are unavailable
for verification, so these values do not establish a verified head-to-head advantage. The exploratory
8


Fulcrum.AI
Table 5: Reported ablation scores on FGCCES. Significance symbols are retained from the source
report but not independently verified.
Configuration
R@1
∆
Full MSEF
72.5±0.8
—
Data utilization
Complete chains only
52.8±1.3
−19.7†
w/o fine-grained subperiods
68.3±0.9
−4.2†
Architecture components
Single manifold (no Neural ODE)
62.2±1.1
−10.3†
w/o cascaded retrieval
64.0±1.0
−8.5†
w/o bidirectional verification
66.3±0.9
−6.2†
w/o step-wise pruning
68.8±0.9
−3.7†
w/o dynamic features
67.5±0.9
−5.0†
Training objectives
w/o multi-scale losses
68.4±0.9
−4.1†
w/o cycle consistency
69.0±0.8
−3.5†
w/o survival prediction
71.2±0.8
−1.3∗
Table 6: Expert-evaluation percentages reported in the manuscript for 100 challenging cases; case-
level records are unavailable for independent verification.
Evaluation Outcome
Pct.
Agrees with expert consensus
72%
Disagrees, later validated
12%
Disagrees, experts maintain
16%
Joint-Consistent CrossFont result also reaches 72.5% R@1 (Appendix C.1.2); a method advantage
over that comparator requires matched evaluation protocols. Appendix O.5 discusses the fairness of
MSEF’s cross-era data utilization.
3.3
ABLATION STUDIES (RQ2)
Component Ablation Study. Table 5 retains manuscript-reported FGCCES ablation scores. Run
configurations and significance annotations cannot be independently verified; differences do not
establish causal component contributions. (1) Data Utilization: The reported complete-chain
configuration is 19.7 points below the full-model point estimate. This unverified comparison does
not establish that chain completeness alone caused the difference. (2) Manifold Modeling: The
reported static-manifold configuration is 10.3 points below the full-model point estimate; without
verified matched runs, this is descriptive rather than evidence for a component effect. (3) Inference
Mechanism: The reported no-cascade and no-verification configurations are 8.5 and 6.2 points below
the full-model point estimate. These unverified differences do not establish the mechanism’s causal
effect. Appendix O.11 reports a micro-level ablation of backward verification; its underlying records
are unavailable for independent verification. Effect of Intermediate Eras. The manuscript reports
61.2% for a two-era configuration and 72.5% for the five-era configuration. Intermediate increments
are not interpreted as isolated era effects because coverage and supervision vary, and the underlying
runs are unavailable for verification. These unverified scores are descriptive only; the underlying runs
are unavailable for independent inspection.
3.4
EXPERT EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS (RQ3)
Blind Expert Evaluation. The manuscript reports that two experts assessed 100 challenging
FGCCES-Test cases (Table 6), with 72% agreement, 12% later-validated disagreements, and 16%
unresolved disagreements. Case-level evidence and validation records for the 12 cases are unavailable
9


Fulcrum.AI
for independent verification. Error analysis and the interpretation of confidence scores are discussed
in Appendices O.6 and O.7.
4
CONCLUSION
We described MSEF, a framework for representing script forms in a time-conditioned latent space
and modeling transitions with a Neural ODE. By modeling each era with its own manifold space
and learning inter-era transitions via Neural ODE, MSEF enables training on incomplete chains
and bidirectional verification for temporal consistency. Reported benchmark scores are preliminary
summaries; unresolved dataset manifests, adapters, aggregation, and comparison details prevent firm
conclusions about comparative performance.
10


Fulcrum.AI
REFERENCES
Marin Biloš, Johanna Sommer, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Tim Januschowski, and Stephan Gün-
nemann. Neural flows: Efficient alternative to neural odes. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 34:21325–21337, 2021.
Françoise Bottéro. The origin and early development of the chinese writing system, 1996.
Xiang Chang, Fei Chao, Changjing Shang, and Qiang Shen. Sundial-gan: A cascade generative
adversarial networks framework for deciphering oracle bone inscriptions. In Proceedings of the
30th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp. 1195–1203, 2022.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Zijian Chen, Tingzhu Chen, Wenjun Zhang, and Guangtao Zhai. Obi-bench: Can lmms aid in study
of ancient script on oracle bones? arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01175, 2024.
Zijian Chen, Wenjie Hua, Jinhao Li, Lirong Deng, Fan Du, Tingzhu Chen, and Guangtao Zhai.
Pictobi-20k: Unveiling large multimodal models in visual decipherment for pictographic oracle
bone characters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05773, 2025.
Emilien Dupont, Arnaud Doucet, and Yee Whye Teh. Augmented neural odes. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Junheng Gao and Xun Liang. Distinguishing oracle variants based on the isomorphism and symmetry
invariances of oracle-bone inscriptions. IEEE access, 8:152258–152275, 2020.
Haisu Guan, Huanxin Yang, Xinyu Wang, Shengwei Han, Yongge Liu, Lianwen Jin, Xiang Bai,
and Yuliang Liu. Deciphering oracle bone language with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.00684, 2024.
Jun Guo, Changhu Wang, Edgar Roman-Rangel, Hongyang Chao, and Yong Rui. Building hierar-
chical representations for oracle character and sketch recognition. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 25(1):104–118, 2015.
Zhikai Hu, Yiu-ming Cheung, Yonggang Zhang, Peiying Zhang, and Pui-ling Tang. Component-
level oracle bone inscription retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on
Multimedia Retrieval, pp. 647–656, 2024.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134, 2017.
Alan Julian Izenman. Introduction to manifold learning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computa-
tional Statistics, 4(5):439–446, 2012.
Hanqi Jiang, Yi Pan, Junhao Chen, Zhengliang Liu, Yifan Zhou, Peng Shu, Yiwei Li, Huaqin Zhao,
Stephen Mihm, Lewis C Howe, et al. Oraclesage: Towards unified visual-linguistic understanding
of oracle bone scripts through cross-modal knowledge fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17837,
2024.
Yifan Jin and Xi Yang. Interactively rejioning 2d oracle bone fragments based on contour matching.
In 2023 9th International Conference on Virtual Reality (ICVR), pp. 163–170. IEEE, 2023.
David N Keightley. Sources of Shang history: the oracle-bone inscriptions of Bronze Age China.
Univ of California Press, 1985.
Hyeongju Kim, Hyeonseung Lee, Woo Hyun Kang, Joun Yeop Lee, and Nam Soo Kim. Softflow:
Probabilistic framework for normalizing flow on manifolds. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:16388–16397, 2020.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Qi Mao, Jia-Bin Huang, Yu-Ding Lu, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-
Hsuan Yang. Drit++: Diverse image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.01270, 2019.
11


Fulcrum.AI
Bang Li, Qianwen Dai, Feng Gao, Weiye Zhu, Qiang Li, and Yongge Liu. Hwobc-a handwriting
oracle bone character recognition database. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume
1651, pp. 012050. IOP Publishing, 2020.
Bo Li, Kaitao Xue, Bin Liu, and Yu-Kun Lai. Bbdm: Image-to-image translation with brownian
bridge diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern Recognition, pp. 1952–1961, 2023a.
Caoshuo Li, Zengmao Ding, Xiaobin Hu, Bang Li, Donghao Luo, Xu Peng, Taisong Jin, Yongge Liu,
Shengwei Han, Jing Yang, et al. Oracleagent: A multimodal reasoning agent for oracle bone script
research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26114, 2025a.
Caoshuo Li, Zengmao Ding, Xiaobin Hu, Bang Li, Donghao Luo, AndyPian Wu, Chaoyang Wang,
Chengjie Wang, Taisong Jin, Seven Shu, et al. Oraclefusion: Assisting the decipherment of oracle
bone script with structurally constrained semantic typography. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19893–19902, 2025b.
Donghao Li and Binfang Du. Research on oracle bone inscription segmentation and recognition model
based on deep learning. In 2024 IEEE 4th International Conference on Electronic Technology,
Communication and Information (ICETCI), pp. 1309–1314. IEEE, 2024.
Jing Li, Qiu-Feng Wang, Kaizhu Huang, Xi Yang, Rui Zhang, and John Y Goulermas. Towards better
long-tailed oracle character recognition with adversarial data augmentation. Pattern Recognition,
140:109534, 2023b.
Jing Li, Qiu-Feng Wang, Siyuan Wang, Rui Zhang, Kaizhu Huang, and Erik Cambria. Diff-oracle: De-
ciphering oracle bone scripts with controllable diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13631,
2023c.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
Decoupled weight decay regularization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Marina Meil˘a and Hanyu Zhang. Manifold learning: What, how, and why. Annual Review of Statistics
and Its Application, 11(1):393–417, 2024.
Lin Meng, Naoki Kamitoku, and Katsuhiro Yamazaki. Recognition of oracle bone inscriptions
using deep learning based on data augmentation. In 2018 metrology for archaeology and cultural
heritage (MetroArchaeo), pp. 33–38. IEEE, 2018.
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky TQ Chen, and David K Duvenaud. Latent ordinary differential equations for
irregularly-sampled time series. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet,
and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022
conference proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.
Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, 45(4):4713–4726, 2022b.
Minju Seo, Jinheon Baek, Seongyun Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Paper2code: Automating code
generation from scientific papers in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17192, 2025.
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. A dataset of oracle characters for benchmarking machine learning
algorithms. Scientific Data, 11(1):87, 2024.
Zhicong Wu, Qifeng Su, Ke Gu, and Xiaodong Shi. A cross-font image retrieval network for
recognizing undeciphered oracle bone inscriptions. In International Conference on Intelligent
Computing, pp. 196–208. Springer, 2025.
Yi-Kang Zhang, Heng Zhang, Yong-Ge Liu, Qing Yang, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Oracle character
recognition by nearest neighbor classification with deep metric learning. In 2019 International
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), pp. 309–314. IEEE, 2019.
12


Fulcrum.AI
Qianqian Zhen, Liang Wu, and Guoying Liu. An oracle bone inscriptions detection algorithm based
on improved yolov8. Algorithms, 17(5):174, 2024.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.
A
APPENDIX ROADMAP
Scope of the supplementary evidence.
The appendix separates mathematical consequences of the
stated model from experimental summaries. Numerical summaries without a documented sample-
level protocol are explicitly identified below as unvalidated observations; they are not additional
verified comparisons. In particular, unspecified implementation choices are not replaced with assumed
settings, and a retained table does not establish that its configuration matches another table. These
distinctions also limit the interpretation of the corresponding main-text summaries. The appendix
provides methodological details, supplementary analyses, and documentation supporting the main
paper.
Background and motivation.
Appendix B discusses related work. Appendix C presents ex-
ploratory analyses motivating multi-era modeling and candidate verification. These analyses motivate
design choices rather than establish the necessity of a unique architecture.
Representation and dynamics diagnostics.
Appendix D examines input sensitivity, attention
patterns, latent geometry, survival scores, and vector analogies. These analyses characterize model
behavior; they do not independently establish historical causality, equivalence to human cognition, or
the absence of memorization.
Method and implementation.
Appendix E summarizes the model. Appendix F defines the training
objectives. Appendix G specifies CBED inference. Appendices K, L, and M describe time encoding,
feature extraction, and implementation settings.
Dataset.
Appendices H and N describe dataset organization, counting units, splits, and provenance.
Appendix R illustrates the available temporal and scribal-group annotations.
Theory and empirical diagnostics.
Appendix I states the regularity assumptions and properties of
the latent ODE flow. Appendix J distinguishes conditional mathematical results from finite-sample
diagnostics. Appendix Q visualizes local retrieval neighborhoods.
Additional experiments.
Appendix O reports supplementary evaluations, ablation analyses, compu-
tational measurements, and benchmark-specific protocol requirements. Error analysis and confidence
evaluation appear in Appendices O.6 and O.7. Appendices O.10 and O.11 examine alternative
dynamics and backward verification.
B
RELATED WORK
Our work connects continuous-time representation learning with computational analysis of Oracle
Bone Inscriptions.
B.1
MANIFOLD LEARNING AND CONTINUOUS-TIME MODELS
Manifold learning studies low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional observations (Izenman,
2012). Neural ODEs parameterize the derivative of a latent state and compute transformations
through numerical integration (Chen et al., 2018). Latent ODEs explicitly address irregularly sampled
observations and variable temporal gaps (Rubanova et al., 2019). Augmented Neural ODEs and
neural flows investigate alternative parameterizations and representational properties of continuous-
time models (Dupont et al., 2019; Biloš et al., 2021). Related flow-based methods also study
13


Fulcrum.AI
probability modeling for data with manifold structure (Kim et al., 2020). Accordingly, incomplete
observations and continuous time are not capabilities unique to MSEF. Our focus is their use in
cross-era glyph representation learning, together with candidate retrieval and verification against
available intermediate-era evidence.
B.2
COMPUTATIONAL OBI ANALYSIS
Computational OBI research includes recognition, retrieval, image generation, and multimodal
analysis (Jin & Yang, 2023; Zhen et al., 2024; Gao & Liang, 2020). Recognition methods address
identification within labeled character inventories (Li & Du, 2024). Generative approaches include
Sundial-GAN (Chang et al., 2022), Diff-Oracle (Li et al., 2023c), and OBSD (Guan et al., 2024).
Retrieval methods include cross-font comparison with historical reference glyphs (Wu et al., 2025).
OBI-Bench, OracleSage, and OracleAgent investigate multimodal understanding and reasoning (Chen
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a). MSEF differs in jointly learning time-conditioned
latent representations and inter-era dynamics from observed correspondences, followed by candidate-
level backward verification. This distinction does not imply that competing methods cannot be
augmented with temporal information. Such augmentations are important comparators, including the
sequence-consistency baseline examined in Appendix C.
C
PRE-EXPLORATORY STEP-BY-STEP RESEARCH
This section presents exploratory analyses motivating multi-era modeling and candidate verification.
These analyses concern the specific implementations and datasets examined. They do not establish
architectural impossibility results or prove that every component of MSEF is necessary.
C.1
DIAGNOSING EXISTING PARADIGMS
We consider generation-based and retrieval-based approaches. Generation-based methods predict a
target-script representation or image. Retrieval-based methods rank glyphs in a reference collection.
Their performance depends on the available inputs, reference data, training supervision, and evaluation
interface. Table 7 restates selected results from the main paper without combining different models
under a single “best paradigm” label.
Table 7: Selected baseline results under their stated benchmark protocols. Values across different
benchmarks are not directly comparable.
Method
Evaluation
Reported value (%)
OBSD
HUST-OBS/EVOBC, OBS-OCR Top-1
41.0
Diff-Oracle
FGCCES, R@1
52.1
CrossFont
FGCCES, R@1
54.6
C.1.1
GENERATION PERFORMANCE AND EVOLUTIONARY COMPLEXITY
We examine how the reported generation results vary with glyph-distance categories and an abrupt-
transition label. A finite difference between observed glyphs is not itself a test of mathematical
continuity. The reported accuracy is lower for the high-distance and abrupt-transition groups. This
association motivates evaluating intermediate-era evidence, but does not identify a unique cause of
failure or rule out alternative generative architectures.
C.1.2
RETRIEVAL WITH TEMPORAL CONSISTENCY
We compare independent CrossFont retrieval with an augmentation that combines candidate sets
through known cross-era correspondences and cumulative similarity scores. The reported OBI-to-
Regular result of 72.5 has the same point estimate as MSEF in Table 4. If the evaluation protocols
match, these results do not establish an R@1 advantage of MSEF over the augmented CrossFont
baseline. The supplied summaries do not establish matching splits, reference graphs, features,
14


Fulcrum.AI
Table 8: Unvalidated generation-accuracy summary by complexity label. The three distance-group
counts sum to 1,007; the membership relationship of the 112 abrupt-transition examples is not
established. The four rows are not treated as a disjoint partition.
Group
Count
Top-1 (%)
Difference from Low
Low, distance < 0.3
228
67.5
—
Medium, distance 0.3–0.6
445
48.3
−19.2
High, distance > 0.6
334
22.7
−44.8
Abrupt transition
112
14.2
−53.3
Table 9: Reported CrossFont retrieval with and without sequence-consistency filtering.
Era pair
Independent R@1
Joint-consistent R@1
Gain
OBI →Bronze
61.2
74.8
13.6
OBI →Seal
58.4
71.3
12.9
OBI →Clerical
56.7
69.5
12.8
OBI →Regular
54.6
72.5
17.9
candidate vocabularies, or search budgets. The equality of the two point estimates is therefore
disclosed without claiming a controlled tie or an advantage over the augmented comparator. An
advantage over the unaugmented OracleAgent result does not isolate the contribution of continuous
dynamics.
C.1.3
IMPLICATIONS FOR MODEL DESIGN
The exploratory results suggest that intermediate-era evidence can be useful. They leave open whether
the principal benefit comes from representation learning, additional supervision, candidate-graph
access, or the dynamics parameterization. These factors require matched comparisons.
C.2
CHARACTER IDENTITY AND ERA-SPECIFIC FORM
C.2.1
SHARED CORRESPONDENCE LABELS AND VARIABLE GLYPHS
Verified correspondence labels allow different historical glyph observations to supervise a shared
representation. For selected pictographic examples, such as “Ox”, “Sun”, and “Mountain”, this
relation can be illustrated using a common referent and varying glyph forms. This is a modeling
abstraction for the labeled correspondences, not an assumption that every character preserves an
invariant meaning throughout history.
C.2.2
TEMPORAL REGULARITY AS A MODELING PRIOR
MSEF uses continuous latent dynamics as an inductive bias. Sparse glyph observations do not
identify a unique continuous historical trajectory. A smooth latent path can coexist with substantial
differences between observed glyph images. The previously reported fraction of transitions within
two standard deviations of a distance mean is a distributional summary, not a proof of temporal
continuity.
C.3
EVOLUTION PATTERN CLUSTERS AND BASELINE VULNERABILITIES
C.3.1
STRUCTURAL FEATURES
We analyze seven structural descriptors of observed glyphs. These descriptors are used for exploratory
analysis and are distinct from the full 352-dimensional model input. Missing glyph observations are
not treated as measured zero-valued glyphs in this analysis.
15


Fulcrum.AI
Ox
Sun
Mountain
OBI
Bronze
Seal
Clerical
Regular
Abstraction
Figure 3: Selected examples of shared correspondence labels and era-specific glyph forms. These
examples do not imply universal semantic invariance.
2. Construct Script Evolution Sequences
(e.g., Rule-based, Diffusion, Retrieval models)
5. Compare with Baseline Methods
1. Construct Font Features
4a) Intra-Class Analysis
4b) Inter-Class Analysis
(Analyze stylistic differences
(Analyze similarities within
between clusters)
3. Clustering
each cluster)
Figure 4: Exploratory workflow: feature construction, cross-era sequence organization, clustering,
and baseline error analysis.
C.3.2
CLUSTERING PROCEDURE
The counts in Table 11 sum to 881. This is a separate reported summary from the 1,007 distance-
group examples in Table 8; no common sample population is established by these aggregates. The
summaries are not pooled to estimate dataset-wide frequencies. The exploratory pipeline applies
16


Fulcrum.AI
Table 10: Structural descriptors used in the exploratory analysis.
Feature
Description
Stroke count
Number of identified strokes
Inflection points
Direction changes in the contour
Endpoint count
Number of open stroke tips
Mean endpoint distance
Mean pairwise endpoint distance
Horizontal/vertical ratio
Relative stroke orientations
Enclosed area ratio
Fraction of enclosed glyph area
Symmetry score
Bilateral symmetry measure
Glyph-based OBI Evolution Pattern Clustering and Failure Analysis Schematic
Monotone Simplification
Abrupt Transformation
Radical Reorganization
Non-Monotone Change
Structural fluctuation
Morphological mutation
Fail
Success
Cluster 4
Reduction in strokes
Cluster 2
Cluster 1
Cluster 3
Clearer structure
Rearrangement of components
Substitution of parts
Sudden change
Complex evolution
...
...
...
...
Evolution-Based Baselines
Retrieval-Based Baselines
Evaluation
Neglected component 
rearrangement
Lacking discriminative power 
regarding component rearrangement
Struggles to adapt to drastic 
morphological changes
Inadequate handling of the uncertainty 
associated with morphological mutations
Inadequate handling of variant 
characters and non-monotonic paths
Failure Reasons
Figure 5: Illustration of the reported exploratory cluster labels. The diagram is not an independent
test of baseline failure mechanisms.
per-feature clustering and combines assignments through a co-association matrix and hierarchical
clustering. The reported four-cluster solution is summarized below.
Table 11: Reported exploratory cluster membership counts.
ID
Description
Count
A
Monotone simplification
312
B
Non-monotone change
224
C
Radical reorganization
158
D
Abrupt transformation
187
C.3.3
CLUSTER-CONDITIONED ERRORS
These results describe different error distributions across the reported groups. They do not show that
either method fails on every sample outside Cluster A, or prove that the clustering labels identify
causal failure mechanisms.
17


Fulcrum.AI
Table 12: Reported error percentages conditional on the exploratory cluster assignments.
Cluster
Description
Generation error
CrossFont error
A
Monotone simplification
31.2
28.6
B
Non-monotone change
57.8
63.5
C
Radical reorganization
52.3
70.8
D
Abrupt transformation
68.4
41.2
Table 13: Reported results for particular baseline augmentations. These values are not architectural
performance ceilings.
Family
Configuration
Metric
Value
Retrieval
Baseline
R@1
62.8
Retrieval
+ Era fusion
R@1
65.2
Retrieval
+ Temporal constraint
R@1
67.4
Generation
Baseline
Top-1
41.0
Generation
+ Era conditioning
Top-1
47.3
Generation
+ Consistency loss
Top-1
51.8
C.4
FROM EXPLORATORY FINDINGS TO MSEF
C.4.1
INCREMENTAL AUGMENTATIONS
The results show gains for the tested augmentations. They do not exclude stronger augmentations
or alternative architectures. In particular, the 67.4 result cannot be presented as a general retrieval
ceiling in view of Table 9.
C.4.2
A SHARED LATENT REPRESENTATION
A shared latent representation offers a common space for comparing observations across eras. Time
conditioning represents era dependence, while the learned flow models transitions between latent
states. Two-dimensional projections can illustrate local structure, but do not prove the existence of a
particular data manifold or preservation of high-dimensional topology.
C.4.3
RULE-BASED ALTERNATIVES
Rule-based models provide an interpretable alternative to learned dynamics. Their scalability and
accuracy depend on the chosen rule representation, learning procedure, and vocabulary.
C.4.4
CONTINUOUS-TIME DYNAMICS
Neural ODEs parameterize a latent velocity field and allow evaluation at selected integration
times (Chen et al., 2018). MSEF associates this time coordinate with an ordered script-period
convention. The coordinate is not a linear calendar-year scale. Time-conditioned discrete models,
normalizing flows, and diffusion-based constructions remain relevant alternatives. The comparison in
Appendix O.10 concerns a particular implemented baseline rather than all members of these model
families.
C.4.5
BACKWARD CANDIDATE VERIFICATION
Backward verification starts from an observed candidate representation and compares its predicted
earlier states with available reference observations and the query. This differs from integrating a
query forward and immediately reversing the same numerical trajectory. Appendix O.11 reports the
corresponding ablation. In Table 5, removing bidirectional verification changes R@1 from 72.5 to
66.3. The 64.0 row removes cascaded retrieval and represents a different configuration. Overall, these
analyses motivate explicit multi-era modeling and verification, but do not establish Neural ODEs as
the uniquely valid solution.
18


Fulcrum.AI
Inexhaustible Rules
Derive Target Script Morphology
休
Glyph variant
Image Skeletonization Algorithm
Structural Feature Rules
Remove/Handle Breakpoints
Identify/Retain Junctions 
& Inflections
Skeleton
Structural Assessment
Left-Right
Top-Bottom
Other
Component Matching
Left Radical (人)
Right Radical (木)
Evolutionary Principles
OBI→Bronze→...→...→Regular
More Complex Rules
Regular
............
Figure 6: Schematic rule-based matching pipeline. A schematic branching structure is not a proof
that finite rule enumeration is mathematically impossible.
Neural ODE Reversible Script Evolution Schematic
休
Forward Evolution: Predicting Target Morphology
Backward Verification: Reversible Transformation
Continuous & Fully Reversible
Capturing Time-Varying Rates of Morphological Evolution
OBI
t∈[0, 0.3)
Regular Script
t=1
Constructing a Continuous Evolutionary Vector Field
Source Font Space
Target Font Space
Manifold
Velocity Net
Field Net
Source Feature
Target Feature
Figure 7: Continuous-time latent modeling under the time convention in Appendix K. The diagram
does not establish recovery of a unique physical historical trajectory.
D
POST-ANALYSIS: REPRESENTATION AND DYNAMICS DIAGNOSTICS
This section examines the behavior of the learned representations, dynamics, and survival scores. The
analyses are diagnostic: they do not establish equivalence to human cognition, historical causality, or
the absence of memorization.
D.1
SPATIAL ATTRIBUTION ACROSS ERAS
Figure 8 presents spatial attribution examples for selected characters. Corresponding highlighted
structures across eras can suggest sensitivity to recurring glyph components. They are not, by them-
selves, evidence of a learned invariant semantic core. Because the encoder consumes precomputed
features, pixel-level attribution requires an explicit mapping between image perturbations and the
resulting features.
19


Fulcrum.AI
Figure 8: Spatial attribution examples across script periods. Highlighted regions describe the selected
attribution procedure, not direct measurements of historical evolutionary laws.
D.2
SALIENCY-BASED SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
We compare intact glyphs with high-saliency and low-saliency occlusions. Matched occlusion area
controls one aspect of the perturbation, but does not control every possible change in glyph structure.
For a declared compatibility score r, define
∆high = r(x) −r(xhigh),
∆low = r(x) −r(xlow).
The displayed examples provide a local sensitivity analysis. Population-level conclusions require
aggregate results over a specified sample and appropriate perturbation controls.
D.3
LATENT GEOMETRY AND TRAJECTORIES
Figure 10 illustrates low-dimensional projections of latent representations and selected trajectories.
Distances and apparent curvature in a projection need not equal those in the original latent space.
A regular ODE trajectory is continuous. A jagged plotted polyline can reflect sparse sampling,
projection, or large but continuous changes; it is not evidence of an actual discontinuity in the latent
ODE solution. Similarly, removing points from a displayed graph does not establish historical
extinction or improved numerical conditioning.
20


Fulcrum.AI
query glyph
OBI
causal deletion
high-saliency removed
control deletion
low-saliency removed
comparison target
Regular
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
soft cross-era compatibility
baseline
0.152
drop high-sal.
0.122
drop low-sal.
0.156
high = 0.030
low = -0.004
query glyph
OBI
causal deletion
high-saliency removed
control deletion
low-saliency removed
comparison target
Regular
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
soft cross-era compatibility
baseline
0.218
drop high-sal.
0.158
drop low-sal.
0.223
high = 0.060
low = -0.005
query glyph
OBI
causal deletion
high-saliency removed
control deletion
low-saliency removed
comparison target
Regular
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
soft cross-era compatibility
baseline
0.281
drop high-sal.
0.177
drop low-sal.
0.232
high = 0.104
low = 0.050
query glyph
OBI
causal deletion
high-saliency removed
control deletion
low-saliency removed
comparison target
Regular
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
soft cross-era compatibility
baseline
0.323
drop high-sal.
0.266
drop low-sal.
0.291
high = 0.057
low = 0.032
Figure 9: Compatibility-score changes under high-saliency and low-saliency occlusions for the dis-
played examples. Effects vary across examples and should not be described as uniformly catastrophic
or negligible.
D.4
ATTENTION PATTERNS AND MODALITY ROUTING
The displayed graphic contains 144 head entries. With the 12-layer encoder in the main text, this
would correspond to 12 heads per layer only if all layers contribute equally to that graphic. This
conditional arithmetic is not a checkpoint-level architecture specification. The 256-dimensional
output does not determine the internal Transformer width or head count. Attention diagnostics must
correspond to the encoder used for the reported results. For L layers and H heads per layer, the
number of heads is LH.
Attention weights alone do not establish causal importance or disentanglement. These interpretations
require interventions and controls beyond inspection of the attention matrix.
D.5
ACTIVATION INTERVENTIONS AND MODALITY CONTRIBUTIONS
Zeroing an activation and replacing it with an activation from another input are different interventions.
The supplied analysis does not identify the intervention sufficiently to attribute an effect to either
operation. The following equations distinguish possible reporting quantities; they do not establish
21


Fulcrum.AI
OBI (t
[0, 0.3))
Shang epoch
Animals (
)
Nature (
)
Body (
)
People (
)
Objects (
)
Extinct(
)
Bronze (t
[0.3, 0.7))
Zhou epoch
Seal (t
[0.7, 0.85))
Qin epoch
Clerical (t
[0.85, 1))
Han epoch
Regular (t=1)
Tang+ epoch
Focus Character Trajectories Through Manifold Space
 (Person)
 (Union)
 (Eye)
 (Mountain)
 (Mo)
 (Store)
 (Ox)
 (Sheep)
 (Turtle)
 (Prosper)
O
B
S
C
R
O
B
SC
R
O
B
S
C
R
OBSCR
O B
S
C
R
O
B
S
C
R
O B S C R
O B S C R
O
B
S
C
R
O
B
S
C
R
Era Abbreviations:
O: OBI
B: Bronze
S: Seal
C: Clerical
R: Regular
Figure 10: Visualization of latent representations and selected trajectories. Projected cluster structure
is an exploratory diagnostic rather than a proof of topological preservation or historical causality.
which quantity was measured. For retrieval, a target-versus-distractor margin can be defined as
m(q) = r(c+, q) −r(c−, q),
where c+ is a valid target and c−is a specified distractor. An intervention effect is then
∆m = moriginal −mintervened.
This definition distinguishes a retrieval-score margin from a classification logit difference. The
earlier activation-intervention graphic is omitted from the quantitative analysis because its labels
(classification-logit drop, causal importance, and polysemanticity) are not tied to an identified estima-
tor in the available specification. In particular, its plotted values are not relabeled as measurements
of ∆m or PI(i) merely by changing a caption. For nonnegative modality contributions ai,m, with
P
m ai,m > 0, define
bai,m =
ai,m
P5
m′=1 ai,m′ ,
PI(i) = exp
 
−
5
X
m=1
bai,m log bai,m
!
,
using 0 log 0 = 0. Then PI(i) ∈[1, 5] measures the effective number of contributing modalities
under this construction. This index alone does not prove semantic superposition, orthogonality, or a
causal role for particular latent dimensions.
D.6
SURVIVAL-SCORE LANDSCAPES
Survival-score visualizations describe the output of a predictive module. They are not direct measure-
ments of linguistic fitness or historical selection pressures.
Survival and extinction notation.
Throughout the formulation, eω = S denotes the extinction
output and sω = 1 −eω denotes survival. The earlier landscape graphic used S on an axis labeled
survival; its numeric output convention is not established by the available plotting description. That
graphic is omitted rather than silently complementing its values or assigning it a different output. A
small score does not mathematically terminate the ODE. Rejection occurs only through an explicit
inference rule. If the output is interpreted as cumulative survival for the same initial lineage, it must
be non-increasing with target time. A transition from a low score to a high score does not establish
the birth of a new character.
22


Fulcrum.AI
Visual
Structural
Semantic
Contextual
Spatiotemporal
H#1
H#36
H#72
H#108
H#144
Attention Head (sorted by dominant feature)
Visual
(32 heads)
Structural
(58 heads)
Semantic
(36 heads)
Contextual
(2 heads)
Spatiotemporal
(16 heads)
(a)  Attention Head Specialisation Matrix
(144 heads × 5 feature modalities, sorted by dominant type)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Specialisation Score
Visual+Struct.
Struct.
Spatiotime.
visual
struct
era-cond.
era-cond.
struct
sem
 z(t)
(b)  Information-Routing Circuit Diagram
(Key circuits for script-evolution decipherment)
Input
Features
Visual
Circuit
(L1 3)
Temporal
Gate
(all L)
Struct.
Circuit
(L4 8)
Semantic
Circuit
(L9 12)
Manifold
Output
Figure 11: Retained, unvalidated attention-pattern visualization. The graphic shows 144 entries, but
its correspondence to the reported checkpoint is not independently established here. Head preferences
are descriptive, not causal or cognitive evidence.
D.7
LATENT VECTOR ARITHMETIC
Vector analogies provide exploratory tests of local representation structure. For example, a cross-era
analogy can be written as
a = zOx
OBI −zOx
Regular + zSheep
Regular.
The existing example reports a cosine similarity of 0.563 between a and zSheep
OBI , compared with a
random-reference value of 0.035. These values characterize that example only. Ratios to near-zero
random cosine values are not used as the principal effect measure. A broader evaluation should
specify the analogy set, candidate vocabulary, rank-based metric, and random controls. Because
semantic embeddings are included among the inputs, these results must not be described as emerging
without linguistic information.
23


Fulcrum.AI
Oracle Bone Script
Bronze Script
extinct
extinct
extinct
extinct
extinct
Figure 12: Reference variant network before the illustrated filtering procedure.
Oracle Bone Script
Bronze Script
extinct
extinct
extinct
extinct
extinct
Figure 13: Reference network after the illustrated filtering procedure. Reduced graph size does not
establish the historical invalidity of removed variants.
24


Fulcrum.AI
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: - 0.008)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.048)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.008)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.025)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.035)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.037)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.045)
(Avg similarity with unrelated chars: 0.030)
Target Similarity: 0.517
Target Similarity: 0.618
Target Similarity: 0.602
Target Similarity: 0.446
Target Similarity: 0.563
Target Similarity: 0.530
Target Similarity: 0.600
Target Similarity: 0.467
Component: 沐→休
Component: 休→仙
Concept: 早→晚
Concept : 晴→雨
Concept: 热→冷
Feature :牛→鱼
Era shift: 水→木
Era shift:牛→羊
Regular(牛)
OBI(牛)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Regular(羊)
OBI(羊)
OBI(牛)
Regular(角)
Regular(鳍)
OBI(鱼)
Regular(水)
OBI(水)
Regular(木)
OBI(木)
Seal(热)
Regular(火)
Regular(水)
Seal(冷)
Regular(木)
OBI(休)
Regular(山)
OBI(仙)
Seal(早)
Regular(日)
Regular(月)
Seal(晚)
Regular(水)
OBI(沐)
Regular(人)
OBI(休)
OBI(晴)
Regular(日)
Regular(水)
OBI(雨)
Figure 14: Selected latent vector analogies. Individual examples do not establish a globally character-
independent transformation operator or disentangled semantic components.
25


Fulcrum.AI
E
FULL METHOD DETAILS
MSEF consists of a time-conditioned encoder, a latent velocity field, and a survival-score module.
CBED uses their outputs for candidate retrieval and backward verification.
E.1
FEATURE REPRESENTATION
For an observed glyph x assigned time t, the input feature vector is
X = [fvis; fstr; fsem; fctx; fst] ∈R352,
with dimensions 128, 64, 64, 64, and 32, respectively. Extraction and missing-feature handling are
described in Appendix L.
E.2
TIME CONDITIONING
The model uses the ordered time convention in Appendix K. Script type, scribal group, and ar-
chaeological date range are distinct metadata fields. A missing date is not an additional historical
era.
E.3
ENCODING AND EVOLUTION
Write
Eθ(X, t) := M(X, t; θ).
An observed glyph is encoded at its assigned observation time:
zt = Eθ(Xt, t).
Its predicted state at another time u is
ezu = ϕt→u(zt).
In general,
Eθ(Xt, u)̸ = ϕt→u(Eθ(Xt, t)).
Changing the encoder’s time argument is therefore not interchangeable with ODE integration. Neigh-
borhood visualizations are provided in Appendix Q.
E.4
ARCHITECTURE
The main-text configuration uses a 12-layer Transformer encoder with a 256-dimensional output. The
velocity field is a 3-layer MLP with spectral normalization and Tanh activations. The survival module
is an MLP conditioned on the initial OBI representation and target time. The available architecture
settings are listed in Appendix M.
E.5
OPTIMIZATION AND INFERENCE
The encoder and velocity field are optimized using the evolution objectives in Appendix F. The
survival objective has separate labels; its gradient routing is an implementation detail not determined
by the objective alone. CBED first obtains candidate glyphs from later eras, then compares backward-
predicted states with available reference prototypes and the query. Algorithm 1 specifies the proposed
consistent inference procedure.
F
FULL LOSS DEFINITIONS
Indexing convention.
In pair sums, (c, i, j) denotes a particular observed correspondence record,
including its glyph variants, rather than one record per identity and era pair. In the complete-chain
sum below, c ∈Ccomplete indexes a chain record; several chain records can share a character identity.
This avoids conflating glyph paths with unique characters. Let Eθ(X, t) := M(X, t; θ). For an
observed glyph of character c at time ti, write
zc
i = Eθ(Xc
i , ti).
26


Fulcrum.AI
Let Padj and Pskip contain verified training pairs from adjacent and non-adjacent script periods,
respectively. Let
P = Padj ∪Pskip.
A complete chain is a separate record in Ccomplete, not an additional unit to be added to a pair count.
F.1
EVOLUTION OBJECTIVES
For nonempty supervision sets, define
Ladj =
1
|Padj|
X
(c,i,j)∈Padj
ϕti→tj(zc
i ) −zc
j
2
2 ,
(8)
Lskip =
1
|Pskip|
X
(c,i,j)∈Pskip
ϕti→tj(zc
i ) −zc
j
2
2 ,
(9)
Lfull =
1
|Ccomplete|
X
c∈Ccomplete
ϕtc
0→tc
4(zc
0) −zc
4
2
2 ,
(10)
Lcyc =
1
|P|
X
(c,i,j)∈P
ψtj→ti
 ϕti→tj(zc
i )

−zc
i
2
2 .
(11)
The endpoints in Lfull are the assigned observation times of the chain. They are not automatically
zero and one when record-specific times are used.
Meaning of the full-chain term.
Lfull is an endpoint-alignment loss on complete chains. It
compares the first and last observations, not every intermediate observation. If the same endpoint
pair is also included in Pskip, the term reweights that endpoint supervision; it is not an independent
intermediate-path constraint. Intermediate observations enter through the observed pair losses and
candidate verification.
The evolution objective is
Levolution = λadjLadj + λskipLskip + λfullLfull + λcycLcyc.
When a minibatch contains no examples for a term, that term contributes zero rather than dividing by
an empty-set size.
F.2
SURVIVAL SUPERVISION
We use sω(zc
0, t) to denote the target-era survival score, with label yc,t = 1 for supported survival
and yc,t = 0 for a documented negative outcome under the annotation protocol. If the implemented
network outputs extinction probability eω, then
sω = 1 −eω.
For labeled examples Ds,
Lsurv = −1
|Ds|
X
(c,t,y)∈Ds
[y log sω(zc
0, t) + (1 −y) log(1 −sω(zc
0, t))] .
(12)
Absence of an excavated or catalogued descendant is not automatically a confirmed negative label.
Unknown outcomes require separate treatment.
F.3
GRADIENT PATHS
Let θ, η, and ω parameterize the encoder, velocity field, and survival module, respectively. The
evolution objective supplies gradients with respect to θ and η, while the survival objective supplies
a gradient with respect to ω. If the OBI encoding remains connected to the encoder, the chain rule
additionally gives
∇θLsurv = (DθEθ)⊤∇z0Lsurv.
With a detached encoding this contribution is zero. These are different implementations, not conse-
quences of using separate loss names. The available configuration does not identify which gradient
route produced the reported checkpoints, so neither route is asserted as a verified implementation
here. Examples without an observed OBI input do not supply z0 for this loss.
27


Fulcrum.AI
F.4
INTERPRETATION OF CYCLE CONSISTENCY
For the same velocity field and exact integration,
ψtj→ti ◦ϕti→tj = id.
Thus the round-trip loss primarily measures numerical self-consistency. It does not independently
establish correct cross-era correspondence. Candidate verification instead compares
ψtj→ti(zc
j)
with the observed query encoding. The candidate representation is an independently observed target
state rather than the query’s own forward prediction.
F.5
DISCRIMINATIVE REPRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS
The alignment objectives alone admit a degenerate solution:
Eθ(X, t) ≡a,
vη(z, t) ≡0.
All four evolution losses are then zero, although the representation cannot distinguish characters.
This is a counterexample to a guarantee of discriminative learning from these objectives alone; it
does not prove that the reported training runs actually converged to that solution. Freezing an offline
feature extractor alone does not prevent a subsequent trainable encoder from becoming constant. The
manuscript does not document an implemented anti-collapse mechanism sufficient to exclude this
solution. Consequently, no such guarantee is claimed, and no unrun contrastive, classification, triplet,
or variance loss is added to explain existing results.
G
FULL CBED ALGORITHM
Output scope.
CBED returns Regular-script candidate identities or abstains. A low survival score
rejects the entire query in this algorithm; it does not return an early-era reading for a character without
a Regular-script descendant. Abstention records model rejection, not a confirmed historical extinction.
This section specifies CBED using ODE-based forward prediction and backward checks at available
reference observations.
G.1
INPUTS AND REFERENCE INFORMATION
Let
t0 < t1 < t2 < t3 < t4
be the declared inference checkpoints for OBI, Bronze, Seal, Clerical, and Regular scripts. For
clarity, the pseudocode uses one checkpoint per era. Finer-grained observations add assigned
times to the ordered sequence. A comparison uses the same assigned time for the prototype and
prediction; a prototype recorded at a different time needs an explicit transport operation. This
algorithmic convention does not supply the missing numeric subperiod-to-time mapping. Let Dj
contain reference observations assigned to checkpoint tj, with embeddings
zc
j = Eθ(Xc
j , tj).
The reference graph Gref contains only correspondences permitted by the evaluation protocol. It
excludes held-out query identity labels and query-to-descendant answer edges. For previously
retrieved observations A, Reach(A, tj; Gref) returns reachable reference observations at tj through
permitted time-ordered edges.
G.2
REFERENCE PATHS AND MISSING ERAS
A reference path p for candidate c identifies a Regular-script prototype and any available intermediate-
era prototypes associated with it. An unavailable intermediate observation is represented as missing,
not as a zero vector. When no intermediate reference observations exist, a path containing only
the Regular prototype is allowed. Its verification is endpoint-only and must not be described as
independently verified at every era. Let P(c) denote the permitted paths for candidate c.
28


Fulcrum.AI
G.3
PATH SCORES
For a path that passes the available checks, let bzp
0 be its backward-predicted OBI state. Define
rp(q) =
⟨bzp
0, zq
0⟩
max{∥bzp
0∥2∥zq
0∥2, εcos},
εcos > 0.
The candidate score is
r(c, q) =
max
p∈Pok(c) rp(q).
A candidate with no valid path is excluded. This aggregation scores paths before combining their evi-
dence; it does not average incompatible latent coordinates into a potentially misleading intermediate
point.
Survival checks.
The algorithm applies survival checks only through the Seal checkpoint. It does
not reset cumulative survival to one after that checkpoint. Low survival score and failure of candidate
verification are recorded as different rejection reasons.
No implicit re-anchoring.
Forward query states are propagated by the ODE. Candidate retrieval
expands a reference set; it does not reset the query state to the nearest reference prototype. By
the flow-composition property, splitting exact integration into more segments does not change the
final query state. Additional information in the cascade comes from intermediate reference retrieval,
permitted graph expansion, and observed-prototype checks, not segmentation of the same integral
alone.
Scores and evaluation.
Compatibility scores are not calibrated probabilities. The score formula
alone does not specify tie-breaking; the current summary also does not specify the verification
thresholds or path-enumeration limits. These omissions limit exact reproduction of rankings. Retrieval
metrics are computed after deduplicating candidate identities. For closed-set evaluation, an abstention
counts as an incorrect prediction rather than removing the query from the denominator.
29


Fulcrum.AI
Algorithm 1 CBED with observed-checkpoint verification
Require: Query q; checkpoints {tj}4
j=0; reference databases {Dj}; permitted graph Gref; encoder E; flows
ϕ, ψ; retrieval depth K; survival threshold τs; verification thresholds {ϵj}3
j=0
Ensure: Ranked candidates with compatibility scores, or abstention with a recorded reason
1: Xq ←EXTRACTPERMITTEDFEATURES(q)
2: zq
0 ←E(Xq, t0)
3: ezq
0 ←zq
0
4: A ←∅
5: for j = 1, 2, 3, 4 do
6:
if j ≤2 and s(zq
0, tj) < τs then
7:
return ABSTAIN: low survival score
8:
end if
9:
ezq
j ←ϕtj−1→tj(ezq
j−1)
10:
Nj ←TOPK(ezq
j , Dj, K)
11:
Cj ←Nj ∪Reach(A, tj; Gref)
12:
A ←A ∪Cj
13: end for
14: R ←∅
15: for each distinct candidate identity c in C4 do
16:
Vc ←∅
17:
for each permitted reference path p ∈P(c) do
18:
bz ←zp
4
19:
valid ←true
20:
for j = 3, 2, 1, 0 do
21:
if valid then
22:
bz ←ψtj+1→tj(bz)
23:
u ←MISSING
24:
if j = 0 then
25:
u ←zq
0
26:
else
27:
if prototype zp
j is observed then
28:
u ←zp
j
29:
end if
30:
end if
31:
if u̸ = MISSING and ∥bz −u∥2 > ϵj then
32:
valid ←false
33:
end if
34:
end if
35:
end for
36:
if valid then
37:
Vc ←Vc ∪{rp(q)}
38:
end if
39:
end for
40:
if Vc̸ = ∅then
41:
R ←R ∪{(c, max Vc)}
42:
end if
43: end for
44: if R = ∅then
45:
return ABSTAIN: no consistent candidate
46: end if
47: return R sorted by decreasing compatibility score
H
DATASET DETAILS
H.1
COUNTING UNITS
The main text reports 1,358 character categories. The available summaries do not establish final
train/validation/test identity counts, per-era image counts, distinct pair counts, complete-chain counts,
or survival-label counts. Accordingly, Table 14 defines units but is not presented as a completed
numerical dataset manifest. Neither the 586 nor the 1,500 historical chain figure is adopted as a
verified replacement count. We distinguish four units: a character identity, an observed glyph image,
30


Fulcrum.AI
a cross-era correspondence pair, and an evolutionary chain. A correspondence pair identifies two
observed glyph records and their script periods. A complete chain identifies linked observations
across all five periods. Multiple glyph variants can produce several pairs or paths for the same
character identity.
Table 14: Definitions of counting units used for FGCCES.
Record type
Definition
Character identity
Distinct correspondence label
Glyph observation
A recorded image in a script period
Correspondence pair
Two linked observed glyph records
Complete chain
Linked observations across all five periods
H.2
SOURCES AND MISSING FEATURES
FGCCES combines records from jgwlbq, CCAMC, and the BNU character resources. Unavailable
feature entries are zero-filled under the feature convention in Appendix L. A missing feature, a
missing glyph observation, an unknown correspondence, and a confirmed negative lineage outcome
are different states. They must not be collapsed into the same training label.
H.3
TRAIN, VALIDATION, AND TEST SEPARATION
The intended evaluation uses character-disjoint training, validation, and test sets. Under this split
definition, variants belonging to one held-out identity stay on the same identity side of the train-
ing/evaluation boundary. The text specifies the intended protocol; it does not certify a completed
artifact-overlap or cross-benchmark leakage audit.
Query-side information.
The intended simulated-undeciphered protocol excludes query answer
identities, answer definitions, and answer-dependent annotations from feature construction. Actual
per-benchmark masking records are not supplied in the available summary.
Candidate-side information.
Public reference glyphs and permitted later-era correspondences are
distinct from the held-out query’s answer information. Matching a dataset name does not establish
that competing systems had the same candidate-side information.
Cross-benchmark overlap.
Shared source collections can overlap in images, glyph variants,
identities, and artifact context. Character-disjoint splitting alone does not rule out these channels,
including indirect answer information in neighboring same-identity variants. No completed cross-
source overlap audit is claimed here.
H.4
FINE-GRAINED VISUALIZATION
Appendix R illustrates the retained scribal-group and subperiod metadata.
H.5
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING RESOURCES
Appendix N distinguishes FGCCES correspondence records from recognition and multimodal bench-
mark resources.
I
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
The following results concern the ODE in the Euclidean latent coordinates used by the model. They
do not prove that the observed glyph data form a smooth manifold or that the feature encoder is
invertible.
31


Fulcrum.AI
I.1
REGULARITY ASSUMPTIONS
Let
v : Rd × [0, 1] →Rd
be continuous in time and continuously differentiable in the latent state, with jointly continuous state
Jacobian. Assume that v is uniformly globally L-Lipschitz in the state and that
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥v(0, t)∥< ∞.
These are sufficient assumptions for the flow properties below. A finite-sample estimate of a Lipschitz
ratio is not a certificate that these assumptions hold globally.
I.2
EXISTENCE, UNIQUENESS, AND INVERTIBILITY
Proposition: regular latent flow.
Under the stated assumptions, the initial-value problem
˙z(t) = v(z(t), t),
z(s) = zs
has a unique solution throughout [0, 1]. The flow ϕs→t is a C1 diffeomorphism, with
ϕ−1
s→t = ϕt→s.
Proof. Uniform Lipschitz continuity gives local existence and uniqueness. The bound
∥v(z, t)∥≤L∥z∥+ sup
u ∥v(0, u)∥
prevents finite-time escape on the bounded time interval. Continuous differentiability of the vector
field gives differentiable dependence on the initial condition. Solving the same ODE backward from
time t recovers the unique initial state at s.
I.3
COMPOSITION
For any s, t, u ∈[0, 1],
ϕs→u = ϕt→u ◦ϕs→t.
Proof. Both sides solve the same initial-value problem from time s, so uniqueness implies equality.
A deterministic latent flow therefore does not split a single initial point into multiple endpoints.
Multiple glyph candidates arise from the observation and retrieval relation, not from non-uniqueness
of the ODE solution.
I.4
MANIFOLD DIMENSION
The main configuration uses d = 256. A dimension comparison must keep the dataset, evaluation
protocol, encoder family, and parameter-counting convention explicit.
J
MANIFOLD SPACE VALIDATION
This section separates conditional mathematical properties from empirical diagnostics of a particular
trained model.
J.1
CONDITIONAL PROPERTIES AND DIAGNOSTICS
J.1.1
CONTINUITY AND SENSITIVITY
Under Appendix I’s assumptions, Grönwall’s inequality gives
∥ϕs→t(z1) −ϕs→t(z2)∥≤eL|t−s|∥z1 −z2∥.
A velocity bound additionally requires a bounded region of interest or a separate bound on the network
output. It does not follow from local Lipschitz continuity alone.
32


Fulcrum.AI
Table 15: Reported finite-sample sensitivity diagnostics. Sampled maxima are not certified global
bounds.
Reported quantity
Value
Estimated velocity-field Lipschitz ratio
2.34
Estimated flow Lipschitz ratio
8.7
Maximum sampled velocity norm
2.51
Mean adjacent-era distance
0.82
Reported trajectory smoothness statistic
0.15
J.1.2
NUMERICAL ROUND-TRIP CONSISTENCY
For exact integration of the same field,
ψt→s ◦ϕs→t = id.
Numerical implementations can have nonzero round-trip error. A small round-trip error does not
Table 16: Reported numerical consistency measurements.
They are distinct from candidate-
identification accuracy.
Metric
Value
OBI →Bronze →OBI error
0.023
OBI →Seal →OBI error
0.041
OBI →Regular →OBI error
0.068
Composition error
0.015
establish correct historical correspondence. Conversely, a difficult glyph or a rejected candidate
does not establish ODE stiffness. The survival module does not provide a mathematical guarantee
against stiffness. Such a claim would require solver diagnostics, not merely lower retrieval error after
rejection.
J.1.3
CONDITIONAL PROXIMITY
Suppose the initial encoder is LE-Lipschitz and ∥X1 −X2∥≤δ. Then
∥ϕs→t(E(X1, s)) −ϕs→t(E(X2, s))∥≤eL|t−s|LEδ.
This follows by applying the encoder bound and then the flow bound. Shared semantic labels do
not automatically imply the feature-distance premise. An upper distance bound also does not prove
separation between different semantic groups.
Table 17: Reported radical-conditioned geometry. These are descriptive clustering measurements,
not proofs of semantic preservation.
Metric
OBI
Bronze
Seal
Clerical
Regular
Intra-radical distance
1.35
1.28
1.18
1.12
1.08
Inter-radical distance
3.52
3.68
3.85
3.92
4.05
Distance ratio
2.61
2.88
3.26
3.50
3.75
Silhouette score
0.45
0.48
0.52
0.55
0.58
J.1.4
VELOCITY DIRECTION
Let
u = v(z1(t), t),
w = v(z2(t), t).
33


Fulcrum.AI
Assume
min(∥u∥, ∥w∥) ≥m > 0,
∥z1(s) −z2(s)∥≤δ.
For t ≥s,
1 −cos(u, w) ≤L2e2L(t−s)δ2
2m2
.
Indeed,
2∥u∥∥w∥(1 −cos(u, w)) = ∥u −w∥2 −(∥u∥−∥w∥)2 ≤∥u −w∥2,
and the flow and velocity Lipschitz bounds bound ∥u −w∥. Without a nonzero speed lower bound,
nearby states need not have aligned velocities.
Table 18: Unvalidated velocity-cosine and trajectory-angle summaries. The two columns are distinct
reported quantities; the angle estimator is unspecified and is not inferred by applying arccos to a
mean cosine.
Pair type
Velocity cosine
Trajectory angle
Same radical
0.78
11.2◦
Same semantic category
0.71
15.8◦
High co-occurrence
0.65
19.3◦
Different radical
0.35
42.5◦
Random pairs
0.31
45.7◦
J.1.5
BOUNDED VOLUME DISTORTION
If
|∇· v(z, t)| ≤C
on the trajectories of a measurable set A with positive finite volume, then
e−C|t−s| ≤Vol(ϕs→t(A))
Vol(A)
≤eC|t−s|.
Proof. The Jacobian determinant satisfies
det Dϕs→t(z) = exp
Z t
s
∇· v(z(u), u) du

.
Bounding the integral and applying change of variables gives the volume bounds.
This result bounds volume distortion. It does not imply volume preservation or an expected Jacobian
determinant of one.
Table 19: Reported volume-related diagnostics. A sampled maximum divergence is not a certified
supremum over the state space.
Reported quantity
Value
Mean absolute divergence
0.08
Maximum sampled absolute divergence
0.35
Estimated OBI-to-Regular volume ratio
1.12
Mean Jacobian determinant
1.08
34


Fulcrum.AI
J.1.6
TRAJECTORY PERTURBATION BOUND
Let bz and z∗solve the learned and a reference dynamics, respectively. Assume the learned field is
L-Lipschitz and
∥bv(z, u) −v∗(z, u)∥≤ϵ
on the relevant domain. For t ≥s, let
E(u) = ∥bz(u) −z∗(u)∥,
and L > 0,
E(t) ≤eL(t−s)E(s) + ϵ
L

eL(t−s) −1

.
For L = 0,
E(t) ≤E(s) + ϵ(t −s).
Proof. Almost everywhere,
˙E(u) ≤LE(u) + ϵ.
The integrated inequality gives the result. At zero error, the same argument can be formulated using
the upper right Dini derivative.
This is a conditional perturbation bound. It does not prove optimizer convergence, statistical consis-
tency, or recovery of a known true historical vector field.
Intermediate corrections.
Segmenting integration does not change the exact flow. If an additional
correction operator satisfies
E+
i ≤ρiE−
i + δi,
then
E−
i ≤eL∆tiE+
i−1 + ϵ
L(eL∆ti −1),
E+
i ≤ρi
h
eL∆tiE+
i−1 + ϵ
L(eL∆ti −1)
i
+ δi.
For L = 0, the factor ϵ(eL∆ti −1)/L is replaced by its limit ϵ∆ti. An improvement requires
conditions on the correction operator. Nearest-neighbor retrieval does not automatically satisfy such
conditions. The candidate expansion in Algorithm 1 does not itself reset the query state.
J.1.7
DENSITY EVOLUTION AS BACKGROUND
For a smooth probability density transported by the latent flow, the instantaneous change-of-variables
relation is
d
dt log p(z(t), t) = −∇· v(z(t), t),
as used in continuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018). Subject to the required integrability
conditions, the differential entropy satisfies
dH(t)
dt
= Ept[∇· v(z, t)].
These identities are background properties of transported continuous densities. They do not implement
the survival module, prove historical standardization, or imply that distinct points merge under a
bijective finite-time flow. Mean absolute divergence does not determine the sign of entropy change.
J.2
VELOCITY FIELD ANALYSIS
J.2.1
MAGNITUDE BY ERA
These values depend on latent scaling and the selected time coordinate. They are not changes per
calendar year. Under a differentiable, strictly increasing reparameterization u = g(t) with g′(t) > 0,
dz
du = v(z, t)
g′(t) .
Consequently, comparisons of historical change rates require an explicitly justified time scale.
35


Fulcrum.AI
Table 20: Reported latent velocity magnitudes under the experimental coordinate system.
Transition
Mean norm
Standard deviation
OBI →Bronze
1.85
0.42
Bronze →Seal
1.42
0.31
Seal →Clerical
1.12
0.25
Clerical →Regular
0.45
0.12
J.2.2
DIRECTION BY ERA
Table 21 retains the reported direction-summary series. The estimator behind “direction statistic”
and the rule behind “clusters for 80%” are not specified. These entries are unvalidated observations,
not a measured entropy, a certified dispersion statistic, or evidence of historical standardization. No
missing estimator is inferred from their numeric range.
Table 21: Reported direction-dispersion diagnostics.
Era
Direction statistic
Clusters for 80%
OBI
0.42
5
Bronze
0.31
4
Seal
0.25
3
Clerical
0.18
2
Regular
0.12
2
J.2.3
CHARACTER-TYPE ANALYSIS
Table 22: Reported velocity norms by character-type annotation.
Type
OBI–Br
Br–Se
Se–Cl
Cl–Re
Pictographic
2.15
1.58
1.25
0.52
Indicative
1.92
1.45
1.18
0.48
Ideographic
1.78
1.42
1.12
0.45
Phono-semantic
1.65
1.35
1.05
0.42
Character-type labels describe the analysis groups. Their association with velocity does not establish
a causal mechanism.
J.3
LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD ILLUSTRATION
Figure 15 illustrates a local neighborhood around an Ox anchor and a dissimilar Wood reference. It is
a schematic, not the empirical radical-group scatter plot suggested by an earlier caption. Its displayed
proximity therefore carries no quantitative distance or clustering guarantee.
J.4
SUMMARY
The conditional results characterize the latent ODE under explicit assumptions. The empirical
measurements describe a finite set of representations and trajectories. Neither low-dimensional
visualization nor small numerical round-trip error establishes historical correctness, global semantic
preservation, or absence of memorization.
36


Fulcrum.AI
P₀
P1
P2
P3
(Anchor)
Local Neighborgood
OBI Manifold Space
High Similarity Region
(vision, Structural, Semantic)
Pfar
Low Similarity Region
Ox variant 1
Ox variant 2
Ox variant 3
Ox 
Neibors: Similar Variants/Semantics
Wood
Figure 15: Schematic local neighborhood around an OBI “Ox” anchor. Nearby points illustrate
similar variants or semantic associations; the distant “Wood” example illustrates a dissimilar reference.
The surface is an illustration, not a measured radical-group scatter plot.
K
TIME ENCODING DETAILS
The following specifies the ordered era intervals and their interpretation. A record-level numeric
time map, within-interval sampling distribution, and fixed inference anchors are not present in the
available configuration. Thus the era intervals do not constitute a complete executable fine-grained
time assignment. No uniform sampling rule or equally spaced scribal-group chronology is assumed.
K.1
ORDERED TIME COORDINATE
We use the ordered script-period convention declared in Table 1:
IOBI = [0, 0.30),
IBronze = [0.30, 0.70),
ISeal = [0.70, 0.85),
IClerical = [0.85, 1),
tRegular = 1.
These intervals are model coordinates rather than durations proportional to calendar years. Their
ordering is a modeling convention and does not assert that script categories occupy non-overlapping
archaeological date ranges.
K.2
FINE-GRAINED METADATA
Scribal group, regional provenance, script category, and archaeological date range are recorded
separately. A scribal-group label is not automatically an ordered chronological bin. The label None
denotes an unclassified sample, not an additional historical period.
K.3
TRAINING AND INFERENCE TIMES
During training, the stated interval-sampling procedure samples times within the permitted intervals
while preserving the order of supervised correspondences. Sampling additional time values does not
create additional historical observations or determine a unique trajectory between observed eras.
37


Fulcrum.AI
K.4
CONSEQUENCES FOR INTERPRETATION
Latent velocities depend on the chosen time parameterization. Accordingly, velocity magnitude is
interpreted as change per unit model time, not as a measured rate of script change per year.
L
FEATURE EXTRACTION DETAILS
The input is a 352-dimensional concatenation of five feature groups:
X = [fvis; fstr; fsem; fctx; fst].
L.1
VISUAL FEATURES: 128 DIMENSIONS
The visual representation contains contour descriptors (32 dimensions), stroke descriptors (32),
topological descriptors (16), symmetry descriptors (16), and density/appearance descriptors (32).
L.2
STRUCTURAL FEATURES: 64 DIMENSIONS
The structural representation contains character-formation encoding (6 dimensions), compo-
nent/radical representation (42), and spatial-layout representation (16). Image-observable structural
annotations are distinguished from annotations that require a known modern reading.
L.3
SEMANTIC FEATURES: 64 DIMENSIONS
The semantic block encodes dictionary definitions using a BERT-based representation followed by the
dimensionality reduction used in the implementation. In the intended undeciphered-query protocol,
the answer definition is unavailable and its semantic block is zero-filled. Providing that definition to
a labeled benchmark query would instead evaluate a different information setting; the benchmark
labels alone do not establish that the masking was actually executed.
L.4
CONTEXT FEATURES: 64 DIMENSIONS
Let N(c) be the other observed characters on the same archaeological artifact. Define
hc′ = [f c′
vis; f c′
str; f c′
sem] ∈R256.
Making the projection explicit,
f c
ctx =





Wctx
1
|N(c)|
X
c′∈N (c)
hc′,
|N(c)| > 0,
0 ∈R64,
|N(c)| = 0,
where
Wctx ∈R64×256.
L.5
SPATIOTEMPORAL FEATURES: 32 DIMENSIONS
The spatiotemporal block contains a 16-dimensional temporal/provenance encoding and a 16-
dimensional spatial encoding. The temporal information describing the observed artifact is distinct
from the target time supplied to the dynamics. Transporting a latent state does not change the query
artifact’s actual provenance.
L.6
MISSING FEATURES AND EVALUATION AVAILABILITY
Unavailable feature entries are zero-filled. This preserves input dimensionality but does not imply
that missingness has no effect on prediction. Table 23 gives the intended information boundary. It
is a protocol specification, not a retrospective verification of every benchmark run. Candidate-side
reference information is distinct from query-side answer information.
38


Fulcrum.AI
Table 23: Intended information-access rules; execution is not certified by this table.
Field
Query side
Training/reference side
Glyph and provenance
Observed image and artifact metadata
Observed reference records
Answer identity
Excluded from model input
Training identities only; candidate labels
are reference outputs
Dictionary definition
Query answer definition excluded; un-
available block zero-filled
Definitions of permitted reference identi-
ties
Structural annotation
Image-observable components only; no
answer-dependent labels
Permitted reference annotations
Artifact context
Available neighbors; no hidden query an-
swer or answer-equivalent variant
Separate from proof of artifact-disjoint
splitting
Correspondence graph
No held-out query-to-answer edges
Only permitted reference correspon-
dences
L.7
SCOPE OF END-TO-END TRAINING
The offline feature pipeline is distinct from the trainable encoder and dynamics. Here, end-to-end
optimization refers to the trainable components explicitly connected by the objectives in Appendix F.
We do not infer the necessity of handcrafted features from unreported comparisons with deep image
encoders. Any such comparison requires matched data, training budgets, and evaluation conditions.
M
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Scope of the configuration.
The settings below preserve the documented configuration. The
Transformer hidden width, heads per layer, feed-forward width, feature-to-token construction, precise
time injection, checkpoint selection, seed list, and per-checkpoint pruning thresholds are not specified.
The 140M headline and the 144-head graphic cannot be reconstructed from the 352-dimensional
input and 256-dimensional output alone. No undocumented encoder is introduced to reconcile the
parameter count. The configuration below follows the architecture and training setup declared in the
main text.
M.1
ARCHITECTURE
The encoder is a 12-layer Transformer producing a 256-dimensional latent representation. The
velocity network is a 3-layer MLP with spectral normalization and Tanh activations. The survival
module is conditioned on the initial OBI representation and target time.
M.2
NUMERICAL INTEGRATION
Forward and backward integrations use the same learned velocity field. Solver tolerances control nu-
merical error estimates; they do not guarantee exact reversibility or correct character correspondence.
M.3
OPTIMIZATION
The survival supervision objective is defined in Appendix F. A separate survival objective does not
imply that every cross-era pair supplies a survival label.
M.4
PARAMETER COUNTS AND TIMING
Parameter counts distinguish trainable model parameters from frozen feature extractors. Timing
distinguishes offline preprocessing, index construction, model inference, and candidate verification.
The main text reports approximately 18 hours on two NVIDIA H100 GPUs for a training run.
Appendix S gives the corresponding accounting.
39


Fulcrum.AI
Table 24: Architecture and optimization configuration.
Setting
Value
Input dimension
352
Latent dimension
256
Encoder layers
12 Transformer layers
Velocity network
3-layer MLP
Velocity activation
Tanh
Velocity normalization
Spectral normalization
ODE solver
dopri5
Relative tolerance
10−5
Absolute tolerance
10−5
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning rate
10−4
Weight decay
10−4
Batch size
256
Training epochs
100
Gradient clipping norm
1.0
Independent runs
5
λadj
1.0
λskip
0.5
λfull
0.3
λcyc
0.5
Per-checkpoint retrieval depth
5
Survival-score threshold
0.1
N
DATASET CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
Relation to prior cross-era data.
EVOBC already provides a character-evolution resource spanning
six historical stages.1 FGCCES is positioned here by its fine-grained metadata and organization
of partial correspondences, not by a claim that no earlier cross-era dataset exists. The available
documentation does not establish priority for the broader category of unified cross-era datasets.
N.1
SOURCE RECORDS
FGCCES combines OBI records from jgwlbq, Bronze-script records from CCAMC, and later-script
records from the BNU character resources. Each released correspondence should be traceable to its
source glyph records and supporting documentation.
N.2
CORRESPONDENCE VERIFICATION
The construction process uses dictionary cross-references and expert assessment of candidate cor-
respondences. The dictionaries cited in the source manuscript include Shuowen Jiezi, Jiaguwen
Zidian, and Jinwen Bian. Disputed correspondences should remain distinguishable from agreed
correspondences. Variant-level paths should retain the provenance of each edge.
N.3
PAIRS, CHAINS, AND AVAILABILITY
The data support training from partial correspondences rather than only complete five-era chains.
Counts use the units defined in Appendix H. The earlier aggregate availability chart is omitted
because its source-level character totals and 1.5K+ complete-chain bar are not reconciled with a final
FGCCES manifest. Table 14 defines the four units; it does not contain numerical counts against
1Haisu Guan et al., An open dataset for the evolution of oracle bone characters: EVOBC, 2024,
arXiv:2401.12467v2. https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12467.
40


Fulcrum.AI
which that chart could be verified. Partial correspondences remain a supported data organization
without assigning an unverified aggregate size.
N.4
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING RESOURCES
FGCCES emphasizes cross-era correspondence records and associated provenance. Recognition
datasets and multimodal benchmarks serve related but different evaluation purposes. We do not
Table 25: Roles of selected existing resources and FGCCES. This table compares task focus, not
dataset scale.
Resource
Role in this comparison
Oracle-241
Character recognition
OBC306
Character recognition
OBI-IJDH
OBI image resource
OracleSage
Multimodal OBI resource
EVOBC
Multi-era character evolution resource
FGCCES
Cross-era correspondence records
equate the MSEF model with the FGCCES dataset, or equate a pair count with a complete-chain
count.
O
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Interpretation of retained summaries.
Tables explicitly labeled unvalidated preserve supplied
aggregate observations without asserting that their protocols have been reconstructed. They are
not used to establish a matched method advantage, a calibrated success probability, or a common-
hardware speedup. No absent log, adapter, seed, or sample-level record is inferred from the displayed
numbers. This section supplements the main experiments. Benchmark-specific inputs, candidate
collections, and aggregation rules are distinguished explicitly.
O.1
MULTI-ROUND DECIPHERMENT
Repeated identical inference from a deterministic model does not produce additional candidates.
A multi-round evaluation therefore requires a specified source of variation or a rule for selecting
different ranked candidates. For attempts by(1)
q , . . . , by(n)
q
and valid-answer set Yq, a cumulative hit
rate is
Hn =
1
|Q|
X
q∈Q
1
h
∃r ≤n : by(r)
q
∈Yq
i
.
This is not the same as single-attempt Top-1 accuracy, OCR Top-K, or recall at rank n. The definition
of Hn does not establish that the retained score series in Table 26 was computed using that definition.
Repeated deterministic inference alone cannot produce additional attempts.
Table 26: Unvalidated multi-round score summaries (percent). Attempt generation, feedback, and
duplicate handling are not identified by the supplied records; these values are not established
cumulative hit rates or evidence of independent candidate diversity.
Method
1
2
3
5
8
10
OBS-OCR
OBSD
41.0
56.0
67.5
76.5
79.5
80.0
MSEF
71.5
80.5
85.0
88.5
90.5
91.0
PaddleOCR
OBSD
30.0
40.0
46.0
53.0
57.5
58.5
MSEF
58.5
67.0
72.5
77.0
79.5
80.5
41


Fulcrum.AI
O.2
BENCHMARK-SPECIFIC RESULTS
FGCCES ranks character/glyph candidates. PictOBI-20k instead asks a model to choose a real-object
image corresponding to an OBI image (Chen et al., 2025). The available MSEF specification does
not identify an encoder of those object images or a glyph-to-option adapter. Likewise, it does not
identify whether the OCR interface consumes retrieved glyph images or directly scores character
identities. OCR Top-K and the retrieval model’s own Top-K are different rankings. Thus the native
retrieval algorithm alone does not establish comparability of the PictOBI and OCR scores.
Aggregation of PictOBI subgroups.
For disjoint Normal and Complex groups on a common test
population, micro-averaging gives A = wANormal + (1 −w)AComplex, with a common w across
models. The displayed Gemini and Claude summaries imply w ≃0.9011, whereas the MSEF
summary implies w ≃0.8777. The supplied subgroup denominators and aggregation rule do not
resolve this difference. The reported 72.18 is not replaced by a newly inferred accuracy, and is not
treated here as a verified common-population micro-average.
Baseline-column provenance.
The supplied review identifies an attribution issue in the Pix2Pix
column of Table 2: its Top-50/100/200/500 values (4.5, 13.0, 20.0, 21.5) correspond to a DRIT++
series in the cited source. Without a reproduction log identifying that column, the appendix does
not interpret it as a verified independent Pix2Pix reproduction or use it to draw a method-specific
conclusion. This issue is separate from the MSEF output adapter.
Table 27: Main-text score summaries under different prediction interfaces. Differences are arithmetic
only: task adapters and information matching are not established, and the PictOBI aggregate has an
unresolved subgroup-weighting convention.
Evaluation
Comparator
MSEF
Difference
OBS-OCR Top-1
OBSD: 41.0
71.5
30.5
PictOBI accuracy
Gemini: 53.66
72.18
18.52
FGCCES R@1
OracleAgent: 62.8
72.5
9.7
The metrics differ in their prediction spaces and evaluation interfaces. We do not infer robustness
merely because the reported values are numerically similar.
O.3
ADDITIONAL ABLATION STUDIES
Table 28: Reported retrieval results by era pair.
Task
R@1
R@5
OBI →Bronze
80.2 ± 0.9
90.5 ± 0.7
Bronze →Seal
85.5 ± 0.7
93.8 ± 0.5
Seal →Clerical
87.8 ± 0.6
95.2 ± 0.4
Clerical →Regular
89.2 ± 0.5
96.0 ± 0.3
OBI →Seal
74.5 ± 1.0
86.2 ± 0.8
OBI →Clerical
73.2 ± 1.1
85.0 ± 0.9
OBI →Regular
72.5 ± 0.8
86.5 ± 0.6
Differences between tasks can also reflect candidate-set size, query composition, and available
reference coverage. They are not attributed solely to historical standardization.
O.4
EFFECT OF INTERMEDIATE ERAS
The reported results increase as eras are added. Because supervision and reference coverage also
change, this experiment does not isolate the effect of the number of integration checkpoints.
42


Fulcrum.AI
Table 29: Unvalidated era-augmentation summary A. This identifier denotes a report series, not a
verified run configuration. Unreconciled pair counts are omitted.
Eras
R@1
R@5
OBI, Regular
61.2 ± 1.2
76.5 ± 1.0
+ Bronze
65.7 ± 1.0
80.8 ± 0.8
+ Seal
69.5 ± 0.9
84.2 ± 0.7
+ Clerical
72.5 ± 0.8
86.5 ± 0.6
O.5
FAIRNESS OF CROSS-ERA DATA UTILIZATION
Summaries A and B report different intermediate scores: 61.2 versus 63.5 for the two-era case, 65.7
versus 66.8 after Bronze, and 69.5 versus 70.2 after Seal. Their run identifiers, split correspondence,
and reference-access differences are not established. The series are therefore neither pooled nor
described as replications, and the absent configuration difference is not invented. Using additional
cross-era evidence is a useful capability, but it does not eliminate the need for matched comparisons.
Training examples, feature availability, candidate vocabularies, and inference-time reference graphs
are separate resources. The 0.7-point difference between 63.5 and 62.8 does not alone establish
Table 30: Unvalidated restricted-supervision summary B. Configuration equivalence with summary A
is not established; no matched-information advantage is inferred. Unreconciled pair/chain counts are
omitted.
Reported configuration
R@1
OracleSage
60.1
OracleAgent
62.8
MSEF, OBI–Modern only
63.5 ± 1.1
MSEF, complete chains only
52.8 ± 1.3
MSEF, + Bronze
66.8 ± 1.0
MSEF, + Seal
70.2 ± 0.9
MSEF, full
72.5 ± 0.8
a statistically reliable methodological advantage. Uncertainty and a specified comparison test are
required. Joint-Consistent CrossFont from Table 9 must also be considered: its reported OBI-to-
Regular point estimate equals 72.5.
O.6
ERROR ANALYSIS
The original analysis assigns 200 failure cases to the categories below. These categories describe
observed failure contexts, not mutually exclusive causal explanations of model error. Damage and
Table 31: Reported coding of 200 failure cases.
Assigned category
Share (%)
Glyph damage
45
Character splitting or correspondence ambiguity
28
Scribal variants
16
Other/model-related diagnostics
11
variation are also conditions a decipherment model is expected to handle. The table therefore does
not justify the claim that only 11 percent of errors are model limitations.
43


Fulcrum.AI
O.7
COMPATIBILITY SCORES AND CALIBRATION SCOPE
No numerical calibration result is established from the available aggregate summaries. The equations
below define a possible per-query analysis rather than report a completed calibration experiment.
Empty bins are omitted, and all quantities refer to the same evaluation population. Calibration
conditional on accepted queries would need its acceptance coverage reported separately. A normalized
retrieval score is not automatically a calibrated probability. Let Q be the declared evaluation
population, pq a confidence value, and aq ∈{0, 1} the corresponding correctness indicator. For
confidence bins Bb, define
acc(Bb) =
1
|Bb|
X
q∈Bb
aq,
conf(Bb) =
1
|Bb|
X
q∈Bb
pq,
ECE =
X
b
|Bb|
|Q| |acc(Bb) −conf(Bb)| .
For micro-averaging over the same population,
Acc(Q) =
X
b
|Bb|
|Q| acc(Bb).
O.8
SCRIBAL-GROUP ANALYSIS
Table 32 retains group-specific score summaries. The earlier count column summed to 1,400, but its
unit and deduplication convention were not identified. It is omitted rather than relabeled as images,
identities, or artifacts without evidence. The five named groups are a subset of the metadata labels, not
an exhaustive chronology. Without common candidate sets and sampling records, these differences
do not establish historical causes of accuracy.
Table 32: Unvalidated score summaries for five named scribal groups. The count column is omitted
because its counting unit is unresolved.
Group
R@1
R@5
Bin
75.8 ± 0.9
88.5 ± 0.7
Li
73.5 ± 1.0
86.8 ± 0.8
Chu
72.2 ± 1.1
85.5 ± 0.9
Zi
70.5 ± 1.2
83.8 ± 1.0
Huang
68.2 ± 1.3
81.5 ± 1.1
O.9
COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY
Table 33: Unvalidated computational summaries. Common hardware, batching, precision, timing
boundaries, and parameter-counting scope are not established; no cross-method speed or memory
advantage is inferred.
Method
Seconds/query
Parameters
GPU memory
OBSD
0.85
89M
8GB
OracleFusion
0.95
89M
8GB
OracleSage
1.8
7B
24GB
OracleAgent
2.3
7B
28GB
MSEF
0.18
140M
6GB
Using the displayed parameter counts, 7B/140M = 50, not 580. This arithmetic does not verify that
the parameter-counting scopes are comparable.
44


Fulcrum.AI
O.10
COMPARISON WITH A DIFFUSION-BASED PROBABILITY-FLOW ODE
The value 0.023 in Table 16 denotes an OBI–Bronze–OBI round trip, whereas 0.068 denotes an OBI–
Regular–OBI round trip. Neither is substituted into a cross-model comparison without a matched
integration path, solver, and state-normalization convention. The baseline schedule, conditioning,
and supervision are not fully specified, so the retained retrieval summaries are not a controlled
comparison of all probability-flow and Neural ODE models. This comparison concerns the particular
probability-flow ODE baseline implemented for the experiment. It does not establish limitations of
every diffusion-based or time-conditioned model.
Table 34: Unvalidated retrieval summaries for two dynamics parameterizations. The previous cycle-
error column is omitted because its integration paths are not matched.
Model
R@1
R@5
Diffusion PF-ODE
61.4
76.8
MSEF Neural ODE
72.5
86.5
A smaller numerical cycle error is not independent proof of semantic correctness or topological
superiority.
O.11
BACKWARD VERIFICATION AND STEP-WISE PRUNING
Let Cq be the forward candidate set and Yq the set of valid answers. Define
TPq = Cq ∩Yq,
FPq = Cq \ Yq.
For retained candidates Ckeep
q
, the candidate-weighted false-positive removal rate is
FPDR =
P
q |FPq \ Ckeep
q
|
P
q |FPq|
.
The true-positive retention rate is
TPR =
P
q |TPq ∩Ckeep
q
|
P
q |TPq|
.
These metrics are defined only for nonzero denominators.
Table 35: Unvalidated candidate-filtering diagnostics. The analyzed candidate population and
weighting are not established; the percentages are not independently verified estimates of the FPDR
and TPR definitions in the text.
Candidate type
Mean backward error
Removal
Retention
Valid targets
0.025
1.2%
98.8%
Distractors
0.142
82.4%
17.6%
In Table 5, removing bidirectional verification changes R@1 from 72.5 to 66.3, a difference of 6.2
percentage points. Removing cascaded retrieval gives 64.0 and is a different ablation. The diagnostic
score separation supports testing a verification rule. It does not guarantee rejection of all incorrect
candidates or retention of every valid answer.
O.12
SCOPE OF EXPERT AGREEMENT AND SIGNIFICANCE CLAIMS
The main text reports outcomes for 100 cases in a 72/12/16 split. Agreement with experts, acceptance
after further discussion, and validation by independent historical evidence are distinct outcomes. The
available summary does not identify case-level supporting sources, validation dates, or adjudication
45


Fulcrum.AI
records for the 12 cases labeled “later validated”. That category is therefore not interpreted here as
independently confirmed new decipherments.
The main-text significance symbols are retained source assertions, not tests recomputed in this
appendix. Means and standard deviations across five runs alone do not determine a paired test:
the pairing, unit of analysis, test statistic, and treatment of multiple comparisons also matter. No
additional p-value or significance conclusion is inferred from those aggregates.
P
EXTENDED CASE STUDIES AND RETRIEVAL GALLERY
The main text uses “Ox” to illustrate candidate retrieval and verification. This section presents
additional retrieval examples across different glyph structures.
P.1
FULL RETRIEVAL GALLERY
Figure 16 displays Top-5 Bronze candidates for 40 selected OBI queries.
Visual and semantic distractors.
Selected queries have candidates sharing visual components or
semantic associations. These examples illustrate the ambiguity of nearest-neighbor retrieval.
Scope of the visualization.
The gallery shows reference glyphs retrieved from a database. It does
not demonstrate generation of previously unobserved ancient glyph images.
Failure cases and selection.
A selected gallery does not establish that the correct answer is always
retrieved within the first five positions. Aggregate recall and rejection statistics must be reported
separately.
46


Fulcrum.AI
Query (OBI)
Top-5 Candidates (Bronze)
Sun
Moon
Mountain
Water
Rain
Fire
Earth
Air
Lightning
Field
Horse
Ox
Sheep
Fish
Bird
Tiger
Dragon
Elephant
Turtle
Deer
Query (OBI)
Top-5 Candidates (Bronze)
Boat
Tripod
Person
Head
Eye
Ear
Mouth
Paw
Heart
Tooth
Body
Woman
Child
King
Minister
Father
Mother
Teacher
Old
Ghost
Figure 16: Top-5 Bronze retrieval candidates for 40 selected OBI queries. The green box indicates the
annotated target. These examples illustrate retrieval behavior and are not a substitute for evaluation
on the complete test population.
Q
MANIFOLD NEIGHBORHOOD VISUALIZATION
We inspect local retrieval neighborhoods around 20 selected anchors and display five neighbors per
anchor. Visual or semantic similarity among neighbors can be consistent with the representation
objective. It does not independently exclude memorization, particularly when semantic information
is included among the inputs.
47


Fulcrum.AI
OBI Manifold Neighborhood (t=0)
Bronze Manifold Neighborhood (t=0.3)
Figure 17: Local neighborhoods in the OBI and Bronze representations. Each row contains an anchor
and its retrieved neighbors under the declared distance. The visualization characterizes selected
neighborhoods rather than proving preservation of global topology.
R
FINE-GRAINED DATASET VISUALIZATION
Figure 18 illustrates the available metadata and glyph observations for 20 selected characters.
OBI labels.
The visualization uses seven named scribal-group labels: Dui, Bin, Li, Chu, He, Huang,
and Zi. The additional label None denotes unclassified observations. It is not an eighth historical
period.
48


Fulcrum.AI
Bronze (Fine-grained Evolution)
OBI (Fine-grained)
Seal
Regular
Clerical
/
/
/
Dui
Bin
Chu
He
Huang
Zi
L.S
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Sp
Wa
None
L.S
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Sp
Wa
Dui
Bin
Chu
He
Huang None
Huang
Huang
M.Z
Sp
Wa
Dui
Bin
Huang
None
E.Z
E.Z
Li
Chu
He
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Wa
Dui
Li
Bin
Huang None
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Wa
Bin
Bin
Bin
Bin
None
L.S
E.Z
Wa
Bin
L.Z
Dui
Bin
Bin
E.Z
L.Z
Dui
Bin
None
Wa
Sp
E.Z
L.Z
Bin
None
Wa
Dui
Li
Bin
Chu Huang None
L.S
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Sp
Bin
Bin
Bin
L.Z
Wa
Wa
Dui
Li
Bin
Chu
He Huang Wu
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Sp
Li
He
None
E.Z
M.Z
L.Z
Sp
Wa
Dui
Li
Bin
None
L.S
E.Z
Dui
Bin
Zi
None
E.Z
Sp
Dui
Bin
None
Sp
Sp
Sp
Li
Li
E.Z
E.Z
M.Z
Figure 18: Selected glyph observations with fine-grained metadata. OBI variants are annotated by
scribal-group labels where available. Bronze variants use the displayed subperiod abbreviations L.S,
E.Z, M.Z, L.Z, Sp, and Wa. The symbol “/” denotes an unavailable observation in the displayed
collection; it does not establish historical extinction.
Bronze labels.
The displayed categories are Late Shang, Early Western Zhou, Mid Western Zhou,
Late Western Zhou, Spring and Autumn, and Warring States. Display categories and the actual
model-time assignments are documented separately.
49


Fulcrum.AI
S
COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES AND REPRODUCIBILITY REPORT
This section reports computational resources using allocated GPU-hours and distinguishes training,
preprocessing, and inference.
S.1
MAIN TRAINING RUNS
The main text reports approximately 18 hours on two NVIDIA H100 GPUs per run. Under that
configuration, the allocated compute is approximately
2 × 18 = 36
GPU-hours per run.
Five such independent runs account for approximately
5 × 36 = 180
GPU-hours.
S.2
OTHER EXPERIMENTS
Ablations requiring retraining are counted separately from inference-only ablations. Reusing one
checkpoint across multiple analyses does not count as multiple training runs. Baseline reproduc-
tion, feature extraction, hyperparameter search, and exploratory or failed jobs are separate budget
categories.
For jobs r ∈R,
Ctotal =
X
r∈R
grhr,
where gr is the allocated GPU count and hr is the elapsed time in hours. A job is counted only once.
S.3
INFERENCE ACCOUNTING
Inference measurements distinguish query feature extraction, reference encoding, index lookup,
forward integration, and backward verification. Precomputed reference features should not be
presented as zero-cost computation.
T
ASSET LICENSES AND TERMS OF USE
This work uses both newly constructed assets and existing public or academic research assets. We
credit the original creators or maintainers of all external resources used for dataset construction,
benchmark evaluation, and baseline comparison. Table 36 summarizes the main assets, their roles in
this work, and our release treatment.
Table 36: External and newly introduced assets used in this work. Source terms and release treatment
are separate from ownership.
Field
Description
LBQJQW / jgwlbq
Use
Source for OBI glyph images and scribal-group information used in constructing
FGCCES.
Source
https://www.jgwlbq.org.cn/
Terms
Publicly accessible academic/cultural-resource website. We found no standardized
machine-readable open license in the cited source.
Release treatment
We cite the source and do not claim ownership of the original glyph images. Raw
assets are redistributed only when permitted by the source terms; otherwise, the No
jgwlbq assets or FGCCES-derived records are included in the current public package.
Any future redistribution requires checking source terms and documenting item-level
permissions.
CCAMC
Use
Source for ancient Chinese character morphology, especially Bronze-script forms and
period/provenance information.
50


Fulcrum.AI
Table 36 continued
Field
Description
Source
http://www.ccamc.co
Terms
Publicly accessible academic database. We found no standardized machine-readable
open license in the cited source.
Release treatment
The current public package is a CCAMC source-corpus snapshot that retains upstream
records and images. Their original rights and terms remain in force; the repository
grants no blanket license. FGCCES-derived annotations and features are not included.
BNU Character Database
Use
Source for Seal, Clerical, and Regular-script forms and verified cross-era correspon-
dences.
Source
https://www.bnu.edu.cn/
Terms
Academic database maintained by Beijing Normal University. We found no standard-
ized machine-readable open license in the cited source.
Release treatment
The current public package contains no BNU source material or FGCCES-derived files.
Any future release must establish permissions and provenance for each included item.
HUST-OBS and EVOBC
Use
Public benchmarks used for OBI decipherment evaluation following prior protocols.
Source
(Wang & Deng, 2024; Guan et al., 2024)
Terms
Used according to the academic research terms described by the original benchmark
papers or repositories.
Release treatment
We cite the benchmark creators and report results under their evaluation protocols. We
do not relicense the original benchmarks.
PictOBI-20k
Use
Visual multiple-choice benchmark used to evaluate paleographic reasoning.
Source
(Chen et al., 2025)
Terms
Used according to the academic research terms described by the original paper or
repository.
Release treatment
We cite the original benchmark and use it only for evaluation. Any benchmark
redistribution follows the original release terms.
Baseline methods and code
Use
Baseline implementations or paper-based reimplementations for Pix2Pix, CycleGAN,
DRIT++, Palette, BBDM, CDE, Sundial-GAN, OBSD, Diff-Oracle, OracleFusion,
CrossFont, OracleSage, and OracleAgent.
Source
Cited in Section 3 and the references.
Terms
Public code is used under its original license where available. For baselines without
public code, we reimplement from the paper descriptions.
Release treatment
We preserve original notices for any public code used. Baseline reimplementation
code is not included in the planned data-only release, while the original papers remain
credited.
FGCCES
Use
Manuscript-described cross-era Chinese character evolution sequence dataset.
Source
This work.
Terms
The current public release contains the CCAMC source corpus only. FGCCES-derived
annotations, split files, and feature files are not included, and no license is granted here
to those absent assets. CCAMC records and images retain upstream terms; see the
repository rights statement. Research code and model checkpoints are not included in
this release.
Release treatment
The public repository at https://github.com/Fulcrum-XAI/MSEF-data
currently contains the CCAMC source corpus and documentation only. It does not con-
tain FGCCES correspondences, survival annotations, feature files, train/validation/test
splits, model checkpoints, or executable research code. The FGCCES manifest and
these derived artifacts remain unavailable for verification.
Because several historical-script sources are cultural or academic databases rather than conventional
machine-learning datasets, some sources do not provide standardized machine-readable licenses. In
these cases, we take a conservative release approach: we cite the original sources, use the data only for
non-commercial academic research, avoid claiming ownership of third-party materials, and separate
redistributable derived annotations/features from raw source assets. The release description alone
51


Fulcrum.AI
does not establish that every listed file is present or accessible. No repository-content or permissions
audit is reported in this appendix; public accessibility of a source is not itself a redistribution license.
U
BROADER IMPACTS AND RESPONSIBLE USE
This work aims to support computational paleography and cultural-heritage research by providing a
structured way to model Chinese script evolution across OBI, Bronze, Seal, Clerical, and Regular
scripts. The main positive impact is to assist experts in organizing fragmented cross-era evidence:
MSEF and CBED can retrieve plausible evolutionary candidates, expose intermediate-era consistency,
and provide confidence estimates and interpretable analyses that may help paleographers prioritize
which hypotheses to examine. More broadly, FGCCES may support future research on low-resource
historical scripts, cross-era representation learning, and expert-in-the-loop decipherment systems. At
the same time, oracle-bone decipherment is a historically sensitive task. Incorrect model outputs
could mislead downstream historical, linguistic, or archaeological interpretation if they are treated
as final decipherments rather than computational hypotheses. This risk is especially important for
damaged glyphs, rare characters, region-specific variants, semantic borrowing, and characters with
discontinuous or sparsely preserved evolutionary evidence. Therefore, our system should not be used
as an autonomous authority for paleographic interpretation. We frame MSEF outputs as candidate
correspondences for expert review, not as definitive readings. We adopt several safeguards and
usage recommendations. First, the model reports ranked candidates rather than a single unqualified
answer, allowing users to inspect alternatives. Second, CBED performs backward verification
and step-wise pruning so that visually similar but evolutionarily inconsistent candidates can be
filtered. Third, the paper discusses error analysis and the limitations of interpreting compatibility
scores as calibrated confidence. Fourth, for public release, we document dataset provenance, split
construction, preprocessing, and limitations, and we respect the terms of third-party cultural and
academic resources as described in Appendix T. The work does not involve personal data, biometric
identification, surveillance, medical data, or security-sensitive capabilities. The expert evaluation is
limited to professional assessment of ancient script correspondences and does not collect sensitive
information about participants. Consequently, the most relevant ethical concern is not privacy or
direct dual-use misuse, but scholarly overclaiming: users may over-interpret model suggestions as
established historical facts. We mitigate this by making the uncertainty and limitations explicit and
by recommending a paleographer-in-the-loop workflow for any real decipherment claim. Finally,
although this paper focuses on Chinese script evolution, extending the framework to other ancient
writing systems should not be treated as a direct transfer. Other scripts may have different material
conditions, lineage structures, sociolinguistic pressures, and evidentiary gaps. Responsible application
to another historical tradition would require collaboration with domain experts, new source-specific
provenance documentation, and a separate evaluation protocol rather than reuse of the present
assumptions without validation.
V
LIMITATIONS
Specification and evidentiary limits.
The stated alignment objectives admit collapse, and the
implemented anti-collapse mechanism and survival gradient route are not established by the current
specification. Fine-grained time assignments and several architecture and pruning settings remain
unspecified. Unvalidated supplementary score summaries do not resolve these implementation
omissions or establish leakage-free, information- matched comparisons. The PictOBI and OCR
adapters, PictOBI aggregation, independent expert-validation evidence, and final dataset manifest
remain unverified; they are not repaired by the formal ODE results. Although MSEF improves cross-
era OBI decipherment, several limitations remain. First, the framework depends on the coverage
and reliability of cross-era correspondences. FGCCES integrates verified evolution pairs, but the
archaeological record is inherently fragmented: many glyphs have missing, uncertain, or region-
specific intermediate forms. As a result, predictions should be interpreted as paleographic candidates
for expert review rather than final decipherments. Second, our continuous-flow formulation is an
approximation of a more complex historical process. Chinese script evolution includes abrupt reforms,
regional variants, semantic borrowing, component substitution, and one-to-many or many-to-one
lineages. Neural ODE dynamics and bidirectional reachability capture broad temporal regularities, but
may still underrepresent discontinuous changes or characters whose surviving evidence is extremely
52


Fulcrum.AI
sparse. Third, the current evaluation is limited by available benchmarks and expert-labeled cases.
Although experiments cover multiple datasets and blind expert evaluation, they cannot exhaustively
represent all undeciphered OBI characters or highly disputed correspondences. Future work should
expand cross-institutional expert annotation, improve uncertainty calibration, and evaluate MSEF in
paleographer-in-the-loop workflows. Finally, extending the framework to other ancient scripts will
require new lineage datasets and script-specific historical assumptions rather than direct transfer.
53
