Title: The Equivalence Theorem: First-Class Relationships for Structurally Complete Database Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.13603v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 01:33:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# The Equivalence Theorem: First-Class Relationships for Structurally Complete Database Systems 

Matthew Alford 

Network Service Group 

malford@nsgdv.com 

ORCID: 0009-0007-3856-8362 

February 2026 

Abstract 

We prove The Equivalence Theorem : structurally complete knowledge represen-tation requires exactly four mutually entailing capabilities—n-ary relationships with at-tributes, temporal validity, uncertainty quantification, and causal relationships between relationships—collectively equivalent to treating relationships as first-class objects. Any system implementing one capability necessarily requires all four; any system missing one cannot achieve structural completeness. This result is constructive: we exhibit an Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraph (ATCH) framework satisfying all four conditions simultane-ously. The theorem yields a strict expressiveness hierarchy—SQL ⊊ LPG ⊊ TypeDB ⊊ ATCH— with witness queries that are structurally inexpressible at each lower level. We establish com-putational complexity bounds showing NP-completeness for general queries but polynomial-time tractability for practical query classes (acyclic patterns, bounded-depth causal chains, windowed temporal queries). As direct corollaries, we derive solutions to classical AI prob-lems: the Frame Problem (persistence by default from temporal validity), conflict resolution (contradictions as unresolved metadata with hidden variable discovery), and common sense reasoning (defaults with causal inhibitors). A prototype PostgreSQL extension in C validates practical feasibility within the estab-lished complexity bounds. 

Keywords: knowledge representation, equivalence theorem, hypergraphs, temporal databases, causal inference, first-class relationships, frame problem 

# Contents 

1 Introduction 4

1.1 The Central Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.2 What “Complete” Means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.3 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Motivating Examples: From Simple to Complete 5

2.1 Example 1: Team Meeting (Pillars 1 & 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.2 Example 2: Supply Chain (Pillars 1–3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.3 Example 3: IT Infrastructure Incident (All 4 Pillars) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.4 Example 4: Travel Disruption (All 4 Pillars) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

3 Why Existing Systems Fail: Concrete Examples 7

2.5 Visual: Information Loss Under Projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.1 SQL (Relational Databases) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81

> arXiv:2603.13603v1 [cs.DB] 13 Mar 2026

2.6 Visual: Causal Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.2 Labeled Property Graphs (Neo4j and similar) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.3 Semantic Triple Stores (RDF/OWL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.4 TypeDB: Closest but Incomplete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

4 Formal Framework 11 

4.1 Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.2 The Four Pillars: Formal Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.3 First-Class Objects: Operational Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

5 Related Work 12 

5.1 Causal Reasoning: Pearl’s Do-Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 5.2 Probabilistic Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 5.3 Temporal Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5.4 Default and Non-Monotonic Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5.5 Situation Calculus and Event Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5.6 Description Logics and Temporal Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 5.7 Hypergraph Databases and Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 5.8 First-Class Relationships in Data Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

6 The Equivalence Theorem 15 

6.1 Formal Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 6.2 Main Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

7 Applications to Classical AI Problems 17 

7.1 The Frame Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 7.2 Uncertainty Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 7.3 Conflict Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3.1 Non-Destructive Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3.2 Resolution Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3.3 The Context-Collapse Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3.4 Causal Audit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7.3.5 Automated Hidden Variable Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7.4 Common Sense Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 7.4.1 Default Logic via Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 7.4.2 Inhibitor Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

8 Computational Complexity 23 

8.1 Hardness Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 8.2 Tractable Fragment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

9 Prototype Implementation 24 

9.1 Storage Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 9.2 API Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 9.3 Complexity Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

10 Expressiveness Benchmarks 25 11 Information-Theoretic Analysis 27 

212 Discussion 28 

12.1 Representational Coverage Across Knowledge Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 12.2 Implications for AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 12.3 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 

13 Conclusion 31 A Modal Logic Extensions 33 

31 Introduction 

Consider these pieces of real-world knowledge: 

Travel: “The airline’s schedule change for Flight 123 during the March storm led to a missed connection at Atlanta, requiring an overnight hotel stay covered by the airline.” 

IT Infrastructure: “After the overnight Windows update on Acme Corp’s domain controller, half the accounting team couldn’t print Monday morning—the update 

reset a group policy that conflicted with the print driver pushed three weeks earlier to fix a different issue.” These simple statements embody knowledge that no existing database system can naturally represent (see Figure 2 for a visual). Each involves: an n-ary relationship (airline/update, affected systems, context) with attributes; temporal validity intervals; uncertainty (was the storm the real cause? was the GPO conflict the actual mechanism?); and causal chains where relationships affect other relationships. 

1.1 The Central Question 

This paper addresses a foundational question: 

What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for a database system to represent arbitrary real-world knowledge without structural loss? 

We prove that the answer involves exactly four capabilities, which we call the Four Pillars :1. P1 : N-ary relationships with attributes 2. P2 : Temporal validity 3. P3 : Uncertainty quantification 4. P4 : Causal relationships between relationships 

1.2 What “Complete” Means 

We must be precise about what “complete” means in this context (see also Remark 4.8 for the distinction between systematic and ad hoc first-class status). 

Definition 1.1 (Expressive Completeness) . A knowledge representation system K is expres-sively complete iff for any fact f that can be stated in natural language without ambiguity, there exists a representation r ∈ K such that: 1. r preserves the structural relationships in f

2. r preserves the temporal scope of f

3. r preserves the certainty level of f

4. r preserves causal connections in f

4Remark 1.2 (What Complete Does NOT Mean) . Complete does not mean: 

• Omniscient : The system knows everything 

• Inferentially complete : The system can derive all logical consequences 

• Computationally efficient : All queries are fast It means: any knowledge that exists can be encoded without structural distortion . Domain-specific reasoning may require additional machinery, but the representation itself loses nothing. 

Example 1.3 (Language Analogy) . English is “complete” for human communication—you can express any thought. Morse code is “complete” for transmitting English—no information lost. Emojis alone are not complete—some concepts cannot be expressed. Similarly, the framework is complete for knowledge representation; SQL is not. 

1.3 Contributions 

This paper makes the following contributions: 1. Equivalence Theorem: Proof that the four pillars are mutually entailing and equivalent to first-class relationship status (Section 6). 2. Formal framework: Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraphs capturing all four pillars (Section 4). 3. Strict expressiveness hierarchy: Proof that SQL ⊊ LPG ⊊ TypeDB ⊊ ATCH with witness queries at each separation (Section 10). 4. Classical AI applications: Solutions to the Frame Problem, conflict resolution, uncer-tainty propagation, and common sense reasoning as direct consequences of the four pillars (Section 7). 5. Complexity analysis: Computational complexity bounds with tractable fragments for practical queries (Section 8). 6. Information-theoretic analysis: Formal quantification of information loss when pro-jecting to lower-expressiveness models (Section 11). 7. Concrete failure analysis: Demonstration of structural failures in relational databases, labeled property graphs, semantic triple stores, and higher-arity systems (Section 3). 8. Progressive examples: Four examples showing why each pillar is necessary (Section 2). 9. Prototype implementation: A PostgreSQL extension in C validating practical feasibil-ity (Section 9). 

# 2 Motivating Examples: From Simple to Complete 

We present four examples of increasing complexity, showing how each pillar becomes necessary. 52.1 Example 1: Team Meeting (Pillars 1 & 2) 

Knowledge: “Alice, Bob, and Carol had a meeting in Room 101 on January 15th.” 

Attempt in SQL: 

-- Binary approach : loses meeting identity 

CREATE TABLE attends ( person_id INT , meeting_id INT ) ; CREATE TABLE meetings ( id INT , room VARCHAR , date DATE ) ; 

Problem: The meeting has no identity as a relationship. We cannot say “ that meeting was productive” without creating a separate entity. 

In our framework: 

hyperedge : { Alice , Bob , Carol , Room101 } attributes : { type : " meeting " , productive : true } valid_time : [2024 -01 -15 09:00 , 2024 -01 -15 10:00] 

The 4-ary relationship is a first-class object with its own attributes and temporal bounds. 

2.2 Example 2: Supply Chain (Pillars 1–3) 

Knowledge: “Factory X supplies Part Y to Manufacturer Z (85% reliable), valid until March 2025.” 

Attempt in SQL: 

CREATE TABLE supplies (factory_id INT , part_id INT , manufacturer_id INT , reliability FLOAT , -- Where does this attach ? 

valid_until DATE ) ; 

Problem: The reliability is a column, not a meta-property of the relationship’s truth status. 

In our framework: 

hyperedge : { FactoryX , PartY , ManufacturerZ } attributes : { contract_id : "C -2024 -001 " } valid_time : [2024 -01 -01 , 2025 -03 -31] confidence : 0.85 -- Meta - property of truth 

2.3 Example 3: IT Infrastructure Incident (All 4 Pillars) 

Knowledge: “After the overnight Windows update on Acme Corp’s domain controller, half the accounting team couldn’t print Monday morning—the update reset a group policy that 

conflicted with the print driver pushed three weeks earlier to fix a different issue.” 

Pillar Why Required P1 Each event involves multiple entities (update, DC, GPO, driver, subnet, team) with at-tributes 

P2 Driver pushed 3 weeks ago → update overnight Sunday → failure Monday morning 

P3 Was the GPO conflict the actual cause? Re-quired investigation to determine 

P4 Driver-push relationship interacted with up-date relationship to cause failure relationship 

6In our framework: 

e1 : { TechJones , PrintDriver , 2 ndFloorPrinters , TicketT -4021} attributes : { change_type : " driver_update " , reason : " tray_select_bug " } valid_time : [2024 -02 -26 10:00 , infinity ) e2 : { WindowsUpdate , DomainController , GroupPolicy } attributes : { update_id : " KB5034763 " , method : " scheduled " } valid_time : [2024 -03 -18 01:00 , 2024 -03 -18 03:00] e3 : { AccountingTeam , PrintFailure , 2 ndFloorSubnet } attributes : { scope : " partial " , affected : " 2 nd_floor_only " } valid_time : [2024 -03 -18 08:00 , 2024 -03 -18 15:30] confidence : 0.78 -- GPO conflict confirmed after investigation -- Causal links between RELATIONSHIPS 

e1 -- conflicted_with - - > e2 -- caused - - > e3 

With the framework’s implementation, diagnosing this incident reduces to a single function call: 

SELECT * FROM atch . trace_causal_chain ( ’ print_failure_e3 ’ , depth := 3) ; 

-- Returns : e1 ( driver push , Feb 26) -> e2 ( update , Mar 18) -> e3 (failure ) -- with per - link confidence scores 

The system traverses the causal chain automatically, surfacing the three-week-old driver change that no text search or ticket query would connect to Monday’s outage. 

2.4 Example 4: Travel Disruption (All 4 Pillars) 

Knowledge: “The airline’s schedule change during the storm led to a missed connection at Atlanta, requiring an overnight hotel stay covered by the airline.” 

In our framework: 

e1 : { Airline , ScheduleChange , Flight123 , MarchStorm } attributes : { reason : " weather " , advance_notice : " 2 hrs " } valid_time : [2024 -03 -15 14:00 , 2024 -03 -15 14:00] e2 : { Passenger , MissedConnection , Atlanta } attributes : { original_flight : " UA456 " } valid_time : [2024 -03 -15 18:00 , 2024 -03 -15 18:00] e3 : { Passenger , HotelStay , AirportHilton } attributes : { covered_by : " airline " , nights : 1} valid_time : [2024 -03 -15 22:00 , 2024 -03 -16 06:00] 

-- Causal links between RELATIONSHIPS 

e1 -- led_to - - > e2 -- required - - > e3 

# 3 Why Existing Systems Fail: Concrete Examples 

We now demonstrate concrete expressiveness failures in existing systems. Our comparison tar-gets classes of architecture , not individual vendors: relational databases (SQL) [5], labeled prop-erty graphs (Neo4j as representative of Neo4j, Amazon Neptune, TigerGraph, Memgraph, etc.), semantic triple stores (RDF/OWL, including recent extensions such as RDF-star), and higher-arity relation systems (TypeDB). 72.5 Visual: Information Loss Under Projection 

Hypergraph   

> Tech
> Ticket
> Client
> Error Device
> Resol. Outc.
> Dur.
> e1: single resolution event

project 

Binary Graph         

> Tech
> Ticket
> Client
> Error Device
> Resol. Outc.
> Dur.
> 28 edges, but was this one event or 28 independent relationships?
> ∆H≥log 228 ≈4.8bits lost

Figure 1: Information loss when projecting an 8-entity hyperedge to binary edges. The clean single-event structure (left) becomes an ambiguous web of 28 pairwise edges (right) with irrecov-erable loss of relational structure. These systems are not deficient for their designed purposes; they fail only when the represen-tation target requires all four pillars simultaneously. The failures below are structural—inherent in each architecture’s data model—not implementation shortcomings that a future release could patch. 

3.1 SQL (Relational Databases) 

CREATE TABLE prescriptions (id INT PRIMARY KEY , doctor_id INT , drug_id INT , patient_id INT , confidence FLOAT , valid_from DATE ) ; CREATE TABLE reactions ( id INT , patient_id INT , type VARCHAR ) ; 

-- How do we say " prescription 42 CAUSED reaction 17"? 

CREATE TABLE causes (cause_id INT , -- Points to which table ? 

effect_id INT , -- Points to which table ? 

confidence FLOAT ) ; 

Failure: The causes table cannot have foreign keys to multiple tables. The standard workaround—polymorphic references via (entity_type, entity_id) pairs—recovers the link at the cost of type safety, index efficiency, and normalization guarantees, effectively implementing an ad hoc version of first-class relationships without the system’s support. Other workarounds fare no better: (1) union types break normalization, (2) a single events table with discriminator columns flattens heterogeneous relationships into a sparse schema, or (3) per-type link tables 82.6 Visual: Causal Chain 

Driver Push     

> Tech Driver
> Printer Ticket
> τ: [Feb 26] κ: 1.0
> conflicted

Windows Update    

> Update DC
> GPO
> τ: [Mar 18 01:00] κ: 1.0
> caused

Print Failure     

> Acctg Subnet
> Printer
> τ: [Mar 18 08:00] κ: 0.78
> Each box is a first-class relationship with its own en-tities, attributes, temporal bounds, and confidence. Arrows connect relationships to relationships —not entities to entities.

Figure 2: Causal chain between first-class relationships in an IT infrastructure scenario. Adriver push three weeks prior (left) interacted with an overnight Windows update (center) to produce a printing failure (right). Each relationship contains its own participant entities and carries temporal and confidence metadata. Causal links connect relationships, not entities. (prescription_causes_reaction , reaction_causes_finding , etc.) grow combinatorially as new relationship types are added. SQL:2011 application-time period tables address P2 partially, but temporal predicates ap-ply to tuples, not to relationships as first-class objects. The SQL/PGQ extension (ISO 9075-16:2023) [12] adds property graph query syntax to SQL, but inherits the LPG data model: binary edges only, no hyperedges, no relationships between relationships. One cannot ask “what was the causal structure at time t?” because the causal structure is not a native construct in either SQL or SQL/PGQ. Each workaround reintroduces—in an ad hoc, schema-specific way—precisely the machinery that first-class relationships provide generically. 

3.2 Labeled Property Graphs (Neo4j and similar) 

Neo4j is representative of the labeled property graph (LPG) family, which includes Amazon Neptune (OpenCypher mode), TigerGraph, and Memgraph. All share the same fundamental data model, formalized by Angles [2]: nodes connected by binary, directed edges that carry key-value properties. The recent GQL standard (ISO/IEC 39075:2024) [11]—the first new ISO database language since SQL—and the SQL/PGQ extension (ISO 9075-16:2023) [12] codify this model as an in-ternational standard, with formal pattern-matching semantics analyzed by Deutsch et al. [25] and Francis et al. [24]. Critically, neither GQL nor SQL/PGQ extends the LPG data model with hyperedges or relationships between relationships; the standardized model remains binary. This means the structural limitations identified below are not implementation gaps that a future release could close, but architectural constraints embedded in the standardized data model [3]. 

// Neo4j Cypher - relationships are BINARY only CREATE ( d : Doctor ) -[ rx : PRESCRIBED ] - >( drug : Drug ) // Where does the patient go ? Must create fake nodes . // " Relationships between relationships " - IMPOSSIBLE MATCH ( r1 ) -[: CAUSED ] - >( r2 ) // r1 , r2 must be NODES 

9Failure: Prescription involves 4 entities but LPG edges connect exactly 2 nodes. Modeling the prescription requires reifying the relationship as a node, which loses relationship semantics: the reified node has no arity constraint, cannot enforce participation roles, and is indistin-guishable from any other node in the graph. Meta-relationships (“this prescription caused that reaction”) require a second reification step, compounding the semantic loss. 

3.3 Semantic Triple Stores (RDF/OWL) 

RDF represents knowledge as subject–predicate–object triples, making it inherently binary. Sev-eral extensions address this limitation partially: 

• Classic reification creates four triples per meta-statement (the statement plus its subject, predicate, and object as separate triples). This is a workaround, not native support: the reified statement has no enforced connection to the original triple, and queries must reconstruct the relationship manually. 

• Named graphs allow grouping triples under a graph identifier that can carry metadata, providing a partial mechanism for attaching temporal or provenance information to sets of triples. 

• RDF-star (W3C Community Group report 2023; formal W3C standardization as part of RDF 1.2 is ongoing) enables embedded triples—a triple can be the subject or object of another triple—which directly addresses meta-relationships. Even with RDF-star, structural limitations remain. N-ary relationships must be decom-posed into multiple triples linked by a blank node or auxiliary resource; the n-ary pattern is a documented workaround, not a native construct. Temporal validity requires vocabulary conventions (e.g., OWL-Time) without query-language integration—SPARQL has no AT TIME 

operator. Confidence scores can be attached via RDF-star annotations but lack propagation semantics. We therefore rate RDF/OWL as ◦ (workaround) for P1 and P4 , and × for P2 and 

P3 .

3.4 TypeDB: Closest but Incomplete 

TypeDB supports n-ary relations ( P1 ) and partial relation-to-relation references ( P4 ). Of the systems examined, TypeDB comes closest to structural completeness, and its explicit support for n-ary relations validates the importance of Pillar 1.                                   

> // TypeDB -CAN model structure define prescription sub relation , relates doctor , relates drug , relates patient ; // But CANNOT answer : match $p isa prescription ; AT TIME ’2024 -07 -01 ’ --NOT SUPPORTED ( no P2 ) $p has confidence $c ; --No propagation ( no P3 )

Failure: TypeDB satisfies P1 natively and P4 partially (relations can participate in other relations, but without causal semantics or propagation rules). However, it treats temporal validity and uncertainty as user-defined metadata—optional attributes on relations—rather than intrinsic structural constraints with query-language integration and propagation semantics. A 

valid_from attribute in TypeDB is syntactically indistinguishable from any other attribute; the system cannot answer “what was true at time t?” without application logic to interpret the convention. Similarly, a confidence attribute is a passive property with no propagation through causal chains. This is precisely the “structural loss” that the Equivalence Theorem 10 identifies: without native support for all four pillars, the system’s data model cannot preserve the structural dimensions of knowledge regardless of what metadata conventions users adopt. 

# 4 Formal Framework 

4.1 Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraph 

Definition 4.1 (Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraph) . An Attributed Temporal Causal Hypergraph (ATCH) is a tuple: 

H = ( V, E, AV , AE , τ v, τ t, κ, ≺)

where: 

• V : finite set of vertices (entities) 

• E ⊆ 2V ∪E \ {∅} : hyperedges (can include other hyperedges) 

• AV : V → P : vertex attribute function 

• AE : E → P : hyperedge attribute function 

• τv : E → I : valid time assignment 

• τt : E → I : transaction time assignment 

• κ : E → [0 , 1] : confidence assignment 

• ≺⊆ E × E : causal partial order 

4.2 The Four Pillars: Formal Definitions 

Definition 4.2 (P1 : N-ary Relationships with Attributes) . System K satisfies P1 iff for any 

n ≥ 2 and any attribute set A, K can represent a relationship connecting exactly n entities with attributes A. The entity domain is closed under relationship formation : any relationship that K

can represent is itself an entity eligible to participate in other relationships. 

Remark 4.3 (Closure Under Relationship Formation) . The closure requirement in Defini-tion 4.2 is not an optional extra; it is the natural consequence of treating relationships uniformly .A system that can form relationships over arbitrary entities but excludes relationships from the entity domain imposes an ad hoc type-level restriction: some objects in the system are first-class participants and others are not. This is precisely the non-uniformity that Remark 4.8 identifies as the hallmark of ad hoc (rather than systematic) relationship support. The closure requirement ensures that the “any n entities” quantifier genuinely ranges over all representable objects. 

Definition 4.4 (P2 : Temporal Validity) . System K satisfies P2 iff every relationship r has an associated valid time interval τv(r), K supports time-travel queries, and history is preserved (no destructive updates). 

Definition 4.5 (P3 : Uncertainty Quantification) . System K satisfies P3 iff every relationship 

r can carry a confidence value κ(r) ∈ [0 , 1] , confidence propagates through inference accord-ing to well-defined rules, and the evidential basis for each confidence value (the supporting or undermining evidence and assessment methodology) is itself representable and queryable. 

Definition 4.6 (P4 : Causal Relationships) . System K satisfies P4 iff relationships can partic-ipate in other relationships, and “ r1 caused r2” is representable for any r1, r 2.

11 4.3 First-Class Objects: Operational Definition 

Definition 4.7 (First-Class Object) . A relationship r is first-class in K iff K provides: 1. Store : r can be assigned a persistent identifier 2. Retrieve : r can be fetched by identifier alone 3. Query : r can be the subject of query predicates 4. Compose : r can participate in other relationships 5. Return : Queries can return r as a first-class result 

Remark 4.8 (Systematic vs. Ad Hoc First-Class Status) . Definition 4.7 requires that the five operations apply uniformly to all relationships in the system through a single mechanism, not per-type workarounds. A SQL junction table with a surrogate key satisfies Store and Query for one specific relationship type, but fails systematic first-class status in three ways: (1) Compose 

fails across types—“prescription 42 caused reaction 17” cannot be expressed when prescriptions and reactions live in different tables without polymorphic references that abandon type safety. (2) Query fails for type-spanning predicates—“find all relationships involving entity X” requires enumerating every junction table. (3) Store fails for dynamic arity—adding a participant requires schema modification. The distinction is between one table at a time, each with bespoke schema (ad hoc) and a uniform API for all relationships regardless of type or arity (systematic). Our theorem requires the latter. 

# 5 Related Work 

5.1 Causal Reasoning: Pearl’s Do-Calculus 

Pearl’s work on causality [8] established the do-calculus for interventional reasoning using di-rected acyclic graphs (DAGs) over random variables. Our framework differs from Pearl’s in three respects. First, scope : Pearl focuses on inferring causal effects from observational data; our framework focuses on storing and querying known causal relationships as first-class database objects. Second, structure : Pearl’s causal DAGs connect variables; our causal ordering ≺ con-nects hyperedges (relationships), enabling meta-causal statements such as “this prescription relationship caused that adverse reaction relationship.” Third, uncertainty semantics : Pearl’s framework uses conditional probability distributions; ours uses per-relationship confidence scores with explicit propagation rules (Theorem 7.5). These approaches are complementary rather than competitive. Our framework can persist the output of causal discovery algorithms, providing queryability and temporal versioning for learned causal structures. Conversely, Pearl’s inference machinery could operate over ATCH-stored relationships to derive interventional conclusions that the storage layer does not compute natively. 

5.2 Probabilistic Databases 

Systems like MayBMS [10], Trio, and ProbLog pioneered uncertainty in databases using possible-worlds semantics: a probabilistic database represents a probability distribution over a set of deterministic database instances, and query evaluation marginalizes over possible worlds. This models existential uncertainty—“which tuples exist?”—and supports principled probabilistic in-ference. Our framework models a different kind of uncertainty: epistemic confidence—“how sure are we that this relationship holds?” Each relationship carries a scalar κ ∈ [0 , 1] that reflects the system’s degree of belief, not a marginal probability over possible worlds. Key differences 12 follow from this distinction. Probabilistic databases typically require tuple independence (or bounded correlations) for tractable query evaluation and face #P-complete query complexity in the general case [10]. Our framework imposes no independence requirement: confidence scores are properties of individual relationships, and propagation through causal chains (Theorem 7.5) is computed in polynomial time. Neither approach subsumes the other. Possible-worlds semantics is more expressive for queries that require marginalization over combinatorial uncertainty (e.g., “what is the prob-ability that nodes A and B are connected?”). Our framework is more expressive for queries that combine confidence with temporal validity and causal structure (e.g., “what caused this relationship, and how confident are we in each link of the causal chain?”). Integration—using possible-worlds inference over ATCH-stored relationships—is a promising direction. 

5.3 Temporal Databases 

The TSQL2 project [23] and Snodgrass’s subsequent work [9] established bitemporal models, building on Allen’s interval algebra [1], which SQL:2011 partially adopted. Our framework adopts these semantics ( τv, τt) but extends temporality to hyperedges, not just tuples. This enables queries like “What was the causal structure at time t?” that SQL:2011 cannot express. 

5.4 Default and Non-Monotonic Reasoning 

Reiter’s default logic [7] formalized reasoning with defaults and exceptions using default rules of the form α:βγ (“if α is believed and β is consistent, conclude γ”). Our framework addresses the same phenomena—defaults with exceptions, common sense reasoning—through a different mechanism: defaults are relationships with high but sub-unit confidence ( κ < 1), and exceptions are causal inhibitors or higher-confidence specific relationships that override them (Section 7.4). This avoids the multiple-extension problem that arises in default logic, since conflicts are re-solved by the confidence and specificity hierarchy (Section 7.3) rather than by choosing between maximally consistent extensions. 

5.5 Situation Calculus and Event Calculus 

McCarthy and Hayes [6] introduced the Situation Calculus, later formalized by Reiter [14], as a first-order logic framework for reasoning about dynamic worlds. Situations are sequences of actions; fluents are properties that vary across situations. The Situation Calculus provides a clean solution to the Frame Problem via successor state axioms, and has been extended with probabilistic variants [16]. The Event Calculus, introduced by Kowalski and Sergot [15], takes a complementary approach: events initiate and terminate fluents over time, providing native temporal reasoning without explicit situation terms. ATCH differs from both formalisms in a specific way: they solve reasoning problems (what can be inferred about the future state?) while ATCH solves a representation problem (what can be stored and queried as a database?). Situation Calculus fluents correspond to our time-bounded relationships, but fluents are logical terms, not queryable objects with identity—one cannot ask “return all fluents that were true at time t with confidence above 0.8.” Event Calculus events can be embedded as ATCH hyperedges with temporal bounds, but Event Calculus lacks native support for n-ary events with attributes (P1), uncertainty quantification (P3), and events-about-events (P4). ATCH can be viewed as providing a database layer beneath these reasoning formalisms: store the events and fluents as first-class relationships, then apply Situation Calculus or Event Calculus reasoning over the stored representation. 13 5.6 Description Logics and Temporal Extensions 

Description Logics (DLs) [17] underpin the OWL family of ontology languages and provide decidable fragments of first-order logic with well-characterized complexity. Temporal extensions such as ALCQI with temporal operators [18] and the DL-Lite family for temporal ontology-based data access [19] add time to DL reasoning. These formalisms excel at terminological reasoning (class hierarchies, role restrictions) and provide tight complexity bounds. However, DLs are fundamentally binary: roles connect exactly two individuals. N-ary rela-tions require reification patterns that lose the structural guarantees of the DL framework [17]. Temporal DLs add time to role assertions but not to reified n-ary structures. Uncertainty has been addressed in probabilistic DLs [20], but these handle probabilistic class membership rather than per-relationship confidence with causal propagation. ATCH addresses a different layer: where DLs provide ontological reasoning (what classes exist and how do they relate?), ATCH provides assertional storage (what specific relationships hold, when, with what confidence, and why?). 

5.7 Hypergraph Databases and Theory 

Berge’s foundational work [21] established hypergraphs as the natural generalization of graphs for representing multi-entity relationships. In the database context, Abiteboul and Hull [22] stud-ied complex object models that permit nested and set-valued structures, providing some of the expressive machinery that ATCH requires. More recently, hypergraph-based knowledge repre-sentations have gained attention in the AI community: HyperGraphRAG [13] demonstrates that hypergraph-structured retrieval outperforms binary knowledge graphs for retrieval-augmented generation. The most structurally ambitious recent formalism is Hyper-Relational Temporal Knowledge Generalized Hypergraphs (HTKGH) [27], which extends hyper-relational temporal knowledge graphs to support arbitrary numbers of primary entities plus second-order edges with temporal annotations. HTKGH achieves three of the four pillars—n-ary structure (P1), temporal validity (P2), and partial meta-relationships (P4)—but lacks uncertainty quantification (P3) and causal ordering between relationships. It independently validates the need for most of the ATCH framework while demonstrating the gap that the Equivalence Theorem fills: without all four pillars, the representation remains incomplete. ATCH extends this line of work by augmenting hypergraphs with exactly the capabilities needed for structurally complete representation: temporal bounds, confidence scores, and causal ordering between hyperedges. Without these augmentations, a plain hypergraph satisfies P1 but not P2–P4. The Equivalence Theorem proves that these augmentations are not optional extras but necessary consequences of treating relationships as first-class objects. 

5.8 First-Class Relationships in Data Models 

The notion of first-class relationship status has been explored from several angles without for-mal unification. Sadoughi, Yakovets, and Fletcher [28] introduced Meta-Property Graphs , ex-tending the ISO property graph model with first-class treatment of labels and properties as queryable objects, and supporting reification of substructures (sub-graphs, edges, property sets) as nodes. They explicitly frame reification as “making something a first-class citizen.” However, Meta-Property Graphs does not connect first-class status to temporal, causal, or uncertainty requirements—it addresses what first-class means operationally without proving why specific capabilities follow from it. The Equivalence Theorem fills this gap: it proves that the oper-ational notion of first-class status (Definition 4.7) necessarily entails all four pillars, and vice versa. 14 6 The Equivalence Theorem 

6.1 Formal Preliminaries 

Definition 6.1 (Property Attachment) . A property p attaches to an object o in system K iff: 1. K provides storage for the pair (o, p )

2. K supports queries of the form “return p for o”3. The property is intrinsic to o, not derivable from o’s components 

Lemma 6.2 (Binary Decomposition Failure) . For any relationship r with arity n ≥ 3 and attribute a, decomposing r into binary relationships loses the attachment point for a.Proof. Let r = {e1, e 2, e 3} with attribute a. Binary decomposition yields edges 

{(e1, e 2), (e2, e 3), (e1, e 3)}.

Where does a attach? 

Case 1: To one edge ⇒ other edges’ participation in r is lost. 

Case 2: To all edges ⇒ redundancy and update anomalies. 

Case 3: To a separate table keyed by (e1, e 2, e 3) ⇒ this is reification. The table row represents the relationship as an object with its own identity, satisfying Store and Query .The “separate table” approach is not an alternative to first-class status; it implements first-class status. Any non-lossy solution requires r to be first-class. □

6.2 Main Theorem 

Theorem 6.3 (The Equivalence Theorem) . For any knowledge representation system K, the following are equivalent: 

(P1 ) N-ary relationships with attributes (1) 

(P2 ) Temporal validity (2) 

(P3 ) Uncertainty quantification (3) 

(P4 ) Causal relationships between relationships (4) 

(FC ) Relationships are first-class objects (5) 

Proof. We establish: FC ⇒ P1..4 and each Pi ⇒ FC .

Lemma 1: FC ⇒ (P1 ∧ P2 ∧ P3 ∧ P4 ). If relationships are first-class (Definition 4.7), then 

Store +Query enable attributes ( P1 ), time-indexed retrieval ( P2 ), confidence as property (P3 ), and Compose enables meta-relationships ( P4 ). □

Lemma 2: P1 ⇒ FC . Let r be n-ary with n ≥ 3 and attribute a. By Lemma 6.2, 

a must attach to r itself. This requires r to be Store able (persist (r, a )) and Query able (retrieve a given r). Return follows: if r can be the subject of a query predicate (“return relationships where a > x ”), the result set must contain r as an identifiable object—otherwise the predicate is vacuous. For Compose : by the closure property of Definition 4.2, the entity domain includes all representable relationships. Since r is Store able (established above), r is in the entity domain. P1 then permits forming a new relationship whose participants include 

r—for example, {r1, r 2, mechanism } with attribute {strength }. This is precisely Compose :relationships participating in other relationships. The closure property (Remark 4.3) is the critical bridge: without it, a system could support n-ary relationships over base entities while excluding relationships from participation, which would be the ad hoc type restriction that systematic first-class status precludes. □

15 Lemma 3: P2 ⇒ FC . Temporal validity τv(r) is a property of r’s truth across time. It cannot attach to endpoints (which have different lifespans) or to nothing (it must be stored). By Definition 6.1, r must be storable and queryable. The critical test is temporal identity : when the same real-world relationship holds during intervals [t1, t 2] and [t3, t 4] (e.g., an employee transfers away and later returns), a system without first-class relationships represents this as two separate rows with no shared referent. Queries about the relationship’s temporal history (“how many times has this relationship been true?”) become aggregation queries over an implicit grouping rather than property lookups on an identified object. Note that P2 explicitly requires time-travel queries and history preservation (no destructive updates); these requirements go beyond row versioning with composite keys, because history preservation requires that the relationship’s full temporal trajectory be reconstructible as a property of a single identified object. The moment temporal history is queryable, the relationship must have persistent identity—which is Store .Time-travel queries require Return . For Compose : P2 requires that history is preserved and that time-travel queries are supported. Consider the query “show me all relationships that were valid on January 1 but had been terminated by March 1, together with the events that caused each termination.” This query asks for meta-relationships: it seeks connections between arelationship r, its temporal boundaries, and the events that altered those boundaries. A system that cannot represent r as a participant in such meta-relationships cannot answer this query; it can only list rows with matching timestamps, losing the structural connection between the relationship, its temporal trajectory, and the events driving that trajectory. Since P2 requires time-travel queries over preserved history, and such queries inherently involve meta-relationships with r as participant, Compose follows. Therefore r is first-class. □

Lemma 4: P3 ⇒ FC . Confidence κ(r) is a meta-property —it describes r’s truth status, not a fact about the participating entities. A confidence column on a junction table is syntac-tically possible, but consider: if the same relationship has been asserted multiple times with different confidence values (e.g., one sensor reports 0.6, another reports 0.9), which row “is” the relationship? The system must either maintain a single relationship object whose confidence is updated (requiring persistent identity = Store ), or treat each row as independent (losing the connection between assessments of the same relationship). Furthermore, confidence-based queries (“find relationships where κ > 0.9”) require Query . For Compose : Definition 4.5 requires that the evidential basis for each confidence value—the supporting or undermining ev-idence and the assessment methodology—is itself representable and queryable. An evidential basis is a relationship among the assessed relationship r, the evidence, and the methodology: for example, “sensor s1 assessed relationship r using methodology m and reported κ = 0 .9.” The participants of this evidential relationship include r itself. Representing it therefore requires r

to participate in another relationship, which is precisely Compose . This is not an incidental design choice but a requirement of Definition 4.5: without representable evidential bases, confi-dence values are opaque floats with no principled way to resolve conflicts, combine evidence, or propagate through inference. Return follows from Query as in Lemma 2. □

Lemma 5: P4 ⇒ FC . If “ r1 caused r2” is representable, then r1, r 2 must be referenceable as arguments. Referenceable ⇔ persistent identifier ⇔ Store . Participation in causal relation 

⇔ Compose . This is precisely first-class. □

By transitivity: P1 ⇒ FC ⇒ P2 , etc. All conditions are equivalent. □

Corollary 6.4 (All or Nothing) . A system missing any pillar cannot satisfy any other pillar without workarounds that effectively implement the missing capability. 

The mutual entailment structure is depicted in Figure 3. Corollary 6.4 has immediate prac-tical consequences: it means that incremental addition of pillars to an existing system is futile unless the addition achieves all four simultaneously. 16 First-Class Relationships 

P1: N-ary + Attributes 

P2: Temporal Validity 

P3: Uncertainty Quantification 

P4: Causal Relationships 

> ⇔
> ⇔
> ⇔
> ⇔
> All five conditions are equivalent. Any system with one necessarily has all four. Any system missing one cannot achieve structurally complete representation.

Figure 3: The Equivalence Theorem: mutual entailment between first-class relationship status and the four pillars. Each pillar individually entails first-class status, which in turn entails all four pillars. 

# 7 Applications to Classical AI Problems 

The Equivalence Theorem establishes that first-class relationships entail all four pillars. Anatural question follows: what do those pillars buy beyond representational completeness? In this section we show that the four pillars, taken together, provide natural solutions to four classical AI problems—the Frame Problem, conflict resolution, common sense reasoning, and uncertainty propagation—that have resisted clean solutions in systems lacking one or more pillars. Each subsection addresses a different problem; the unifying thread is that every solution arises directly from the interaction of the pillars rather than from ad hoc extensions. The Frame Problem is resolved by temporal persistence (Theorem 7.1), uncertainty propagation through causal chains is formalized in Section 7.2, and hidden variable discovery (Theorem 7.17) provides automated conflict resolution. 

7.1 The Frame Problem 

The Frame Problem is the classical AI challenge of representing what doesn’t change when an action occurs. In traditional logic, stating “Bob rebooted the VPN” requires also stating that the office address didn’t change, the sky is still blue, etc.—an infinite set of “frame axioms.” McCarthy and Hayes [6] identified the problem; classical solutions include STRIPS-style explicit frame axioms, the Situation Calculus, and the Fluent Calculus. Each requires the knowledge engineer to specify, for every action, what remains unchanged—a burden that grows combina-torially. 

Theorem 7.1 (Persistence by Default) . In our framework, a relationship r created at time t1

remains valid for all t > t 1 until explicitly terminated. No frame axioms are required. Proof. By Definition 4.1, every hyperedge e has a valid time interval τv(e) = [ tstart , t end ]. If 

tend = ∞ (or NULL), e is currently valid. When an action occurs that creates new relationship e′, only e′ is added. Existing relation-ships e1, e 2, . . . with tend = ∞ remain unchanged. The “frame axiom” for each ei is implicit: ei persists because no termination event occurred. 

□

17 Definition 7.2 (Causal Blast Radius) . When causal event ec occurs, only relationships in the 

causal closure of ec may be affected: Affected (ec) = {e : ec ≺∗ e} ∪ { e : e ≺∗ ec}

where ≺∗ is the transitive closure of ≺.

Corollary 7.3 (Automatic Isolation) . Relationships not in Affected (ec) are provably unchanged by ec, without explicit frame axioms. 

The key advantage over prior approaches is that persistence is the default behavior of the storage model , not an added inference rule. Traditional databases are snapshot-based (to know the state at T2, you need a complete new picture); the framework is delta-based (only changes are recorded, and unaffected relationships persist automatically). 

7.2 Uncertainty Propagation 

When reasoning through a causal link, three uncertainty components combine: 

Definition 7.4 (Link Uncertainty Components) . For causal link e1 ≺ e2:

• κ(e1): confidence that cause e1 occurred 

• κ≺(e1, e 2): confidence in the causal mechanism 

• κ(e2|e1): conditional confidence given e1

Theorem 7.5 (Uncertainty Propagation) . For a causal chain e1 ≺ e2 ≺ · · · ≺ en, the joint confidence is: 

κchain = κ(e1) ·

> n−1

Y

> i=1

κ≺(ei, e i+1 ) · Context (ei, e i+1 )

where Context (ei, e i+1 ) is a modifier based on N-ary attributes. 

Example 7.6 (Contextual Modification) . Consider: Power Surge 0.9

−−→ PSU Failure 0.8

−−→ Moth-erboard Short. If the PSU has attribute surge_protector = true , the context modifier reduces the second link’s effective confidence: 

κef f ective = 0 .8 × (1 − 0.7) = 0 .24 

When multiple causal paths lead to the same conclusion: 

Theorem 7.7 (Path Integration) . Given paths P1, P 2, . . . , P k to conclusion e, with confidences 

κ1, . . . , κ k:

κ(e) = 1 −

> k

Y

> i=1

(1 − κi)

assuming independent paths (Noisy-OR combination). Proof sketch. Each path Pi independently produces e with probability κi, so the probability that path Pi does not produce e is (1 − κi). By independence the probability that no path produces 

e is Qki=1 (1 − κi). Complementing gives κ(e) = 1 − Qki=1 (1 − κi), the Noisy-OR formula. The independence assumption is discussed in the remark below; when it is violated, conservative alternatives apply. 18 Remark 7.8 (Path Independence Assumption) . The Noisy-OR combination rule assumes path independence—that the causal mechanisms along distinct paths do not share common causes. When paths share upstream causes (e.g., two consequences of the same root event), indepen-dence is violated and the combined confidence may be overestimated. In such cases, alternative combination rules apply: a max-confidence rule ( κ(e) = max i κi) provides a conservative bound, while junction-tree methods from probabilistic graphical models can compute exact joint confi-dence when the dependency structure is known. The framework stores sufficient information (the full causal graph) to detect shared ancestors and select the appropriate combination rule automatically. 

Example 7.9. Path A: Hardware failure → Offline (65% confidence) Path B: Scheduled maintenance → Offline (20% confidence) Combined: 1 − (1 − 0.65)(1 − 0.20) = 72% confidence system is offline. 

7.3 Conflict Resolution 

In traditional databases, contradictions are bugs. In our framework, contradictions are unre-solved metadata. 

7.3.1 Non-Destructive Storage Principle 7.10 (Logical Coexistence) . If relationship R1 asserts A and relationship R2 asserts 

¬A, both exist in the hypergraph simultaneously. Resolution uses relationship attributes. 

7.3.2 Resolution Hierarchy Definition 7.11 (Conflict Resolution Order) . Given conflicting relationships R1, R 2:1. Temporal : Is one newer? ( τv(R2).start > τ v(R1).start )2. Confidence : Does one have higher κ?3. Source : Attribute-based priority (sensor > manual entry) 4. Specificity : More specific context wins 

7.3.3 The Context-Collapse Principle Principle 7.12 (Hidden Context) . If relationships R1 and R2 assert A and ¬A respectively within the same system, and both have non-zero confidence, then under the assumption that the system contains no genuinely contradictory ground truths, there exists a context variable z such that both are conditionally true: 

R1 : A given z = z1 R2 : ¬A given z = z2

Justification. If A and ¬A both hold with non-zero confidence based on observations, then the observations supporting each were generated under different conditions. Let z represent the conjunction of all conditions distinguishing these observation contexts. Then A|z=z1 and 

¬A|z=z2 are both consistent, and the apparent contradiction is resolved by making the hidden context explicit as an N-ary attribute of the respective relationships. The principle provides 

representational capacity for context-dependent truth; the discovery of the appropriate context variable z is performed by domain experts or by the automated procedure in Section 7.3.5. □

Example 7.13. Contradiction: “The drug is effective” vs. “The drug is ineffective.” Resolution: “The drug is effective (for Group X)” and “ineffective (for Group Y).” The N-ary attribute (patient group) resolves the apparent contradiction. 

19 Example 7.14 (Infrastructure Monitoring) . Sensor A reports “Server offline” ( κ = 0 .95 ) while Sensor B reports “Server online” ( κ = 0 .92 ) at the same timestamp. In a standard monitoring system, this is a contradiction requiring manual triage. In ATCH, both relationships carry the N-ary attribute network_segment : Sensor A observes from Segment 1 (where a firewall rule blocks ICMP), Sensor B observes from Segment 2 (with direct connectivity). The hidden context variable is network_segment ; both readings are correct within their respective contexts, and the apparent contradiction dissolves without discarding either observation. 

7.3.4 Causal Audit 

When conflicts arise, our framework can trace their causal origins: 

Algorithm: Causal Conflict Resolution 

1. Given: conflicting relationships R1, R 2

2. C1 ← CausalChain (R1)

3. C2 ← CausalChain (R2)

4. If ∃e ∈ C1 with low κ (faulty source): 

• Create explanation: “ e caused incorrect belief R1”

• Prefer R2

7.3.5 Automated Hidden Variable Discovery 

The Context-Collapse Principle (Principle 7.12) guarantees that when contradictory relation-ships both accumulate confidence, a hidden context variable exists. This subsection formalizes the mechanical process by which the framework discovers that variable from its own stored attributes. 

Definition 7.15 (Contradiction Signal) . A contradiction signal is triggered when two relation-ship clusters CR = {e : e supports R, κ (e) > θ } and C¬R = {e : e supports ¬R, κ (e) > θ } both exceed a confidence threshold θ after Noisy-OR accumulation. 

When a contradiction signal fires, the hidden variable is identified by examining the N-ary attributes (P1) attached to the relationships in each cluster. 

Definition 7.16 (Attribute Partition Quality) . For attribute a with values drawn from domain 

A, and contradiction clusters CR, C¬R, define the partition quality of a as the information gain: IG (a) = H(C) − X

> v∈A

|C a=v||C| H(Ca=v)

where C = CR ∪ C ¬R, Ca=v is the subset of observations where attribute a takes value v, and H

is the Shannon entropy of the class label ( R vs. ¬R) within each subset. 

Theorem 7.17 (Hidden Variable Identification) . Given a contradiction signal between CR and 

C¬R, the hidden context variable z from Principle 7.12 corresponds to the attribute a∗ that max-imizes partition quality: 

a∗ = arg max 

> a∈A E

IG (a)

where AE is the set of all attributes attached to hyperedges in CR ∪ C ¬R.

20 Proof. By the Context-Collapse Principle, there exists a variable z such that R|z=z1 and ¬R|z=z2

are both consistent. A variable z that perfectly separates the clusters achieves H(Cz=z1 ) = 

H(Cz=z2 ) = 0 and thus maximizes IG (z) = H(C). In practice, the maximizing attribute a∗ is the best empirical approximation of z available from the stored attributes. If no single attribute achieves perfect separation, the hidden context may be a conjunction of attributes, discoverable by recursive partitioning (i.e., decision tree construction over the attribute space). □

Example 7.18 (Hidden Variable Discovery in Practice) . Forty support tickets involve Windows update KB5034763. Twenty produce print failures, twenty produce print successes. Both clusters reach high confidence via Noisy-OR. The contradiction signal fires. Examining N-ary attributes, the attribute driver_version achieves perfect separation: all failures have version 6.1, all successes have version 8.3. The system splits the original contra-dictory relationship into two context-specific, high-confidence relationships: 

e1 : {KB 5034763 , PrintFailure } with driver_version = 6 .1, κ = 0 .997 

e2 : {KB 5034763 , PrintSuccess } with driver_version = 8 .3, κ = 0 .991 

The contradiction dissolves into two context-specific, high-confidence relationships. Empirical validation of this mechanism across diverse datasets is a direction for future work. 

The critical enabler is Pillar 1. Because N-ary relationships carry rich attributes intrinsically, the explanatory variables are always co-located with the conflict. In systems lacking P1—binary graphs, traditional relational tables—the hidden variable may exist in the data somewhere, but it is not attached to the relationship itself, making automated discovery structurally impossible without ad hoc joins or external analysis. 

Remark 7.19 (Computational Cost) . Hidden variable discovery over N observations with m

attributes requires O(N · m) computation per contradiction signal—a single pass through the attribute matrix. 

7.4 Common Sense Reasoning 

Common sense reasoning—handling defaults with exceptions—is notoriously difficult. “Birds can fly” must accommodate penguins, injured birds, caged birds, etc. In classical logic, “All birds fly” fails on the first penguin; the list of qualifications is infinite. 

Definition 7.20 (Contextual Relationship) . Instead of Bird (x) → Flies (x), represent: 

Rf ly : {x, flight } with attributes {species , health , environment }

When a penguin is encountered, we don’t delete the flight relationship; we observe that its 

species attribute value ( Spheniscidae ) deactivates the default. 

7.4.1 Default Logic via Uncertainty Definition 7.21 (Default Reasoning) . • Generic rule: Rdef ault : Bird → Flies with κ =0.95 

• Specific fact: Rspecif ic : Tweety → Cannot_Fly with κ = 1 .0

The system performs a specificity check: higher-confidence specific facts override lower-confidence defaults. 

21 7.4.2 Inhibitor Links Definition 7.22 (Causal Inhibition) . Relationship Rinhibit can suppress relationship Rtarget :

Rbroken _wing inhibits 

−−−−→ Rcan _f ly 

This models the why : not just that Tweety can’t fly, but that the broken wing is currently disabling flight-ability. When the wing heals (temporal change), the inhibitor expires and flight is automatically restored. 

Theorem 7.23 (Qualification Completeness) . Any common sense exception to a default rela-tionship R can be represented as one or more of: 1. An N-ary attribute that modifies the relationship ( P1 )2. A temporal boundary that limits validity ( P2 )3. An uncertainty reduction that lowers confidence ( P3 )4. A causal inhibitor that suppresses the default ( P4 )Proof. An exception to a default relationship R is a piece of knowledge asserting that R does not hold under certain conditions. We show by exhaustive case analysis that every such exception modifies R along at least one of the four structural dimensions. An exception must specify what about R fails to hold. The structural aspects of any rela-tionship are: (i) its participants and their roles, (ii) its temporal extent, (iii) its truth value or degree of belief, and (iv) its causal context. We argue these are exhaustive by observing that a relationship, as a knowledge claim, asserts that certain entities stand in a certain relation during a certain period with a certain degree of confidence for certain reasons. An exception must negate or restrict at least one of these aspects: 

Case 1: The exception restricts which entities or contexts R applies to (e.g., “birds fly, except penguins”). This is a modification of the participant/context structure—an N-ary attribute that partitions the domain ( P1 ). 

Case 2: The exception restricts when R holds (e.g., “birds fly, except during molting season”). This is a temporal boundary ( P2 ). 

Case 3: The exception reduces the degree of belief in R (e.g., “birds usually fly” with κ < 1,accommodating exceptions probabilistically). This is an uncertainty reduction ( P3 ). 

Case 4: The exception identifies a mechanism that overrides R (e.g., “the broken wing prevents flight”). This is a causal inhibitor ( P4 ). We verify exhaustiveness by considering exception types that might appear to fall outside Cases 1–4. Modal exceptions (“birds can fly” vs. “birds should fly”) modify the relationship’s modality, which is an attribute of the relationship—a participant/context restriction (Case 1) where the attribute partitions modal contexts. Counterfactual exceptions (“if the bird had a broken wing, it couldn’t fly”) assert a causal mechanism (broken wing prevents flight) condi-tional on a hypothetical state—the causal inhibitor is Case 4, and the hypothetical conditioning is an attribute (Case 1). Deontic exceptions (“birds are permitted to fly except in restricted airspace”) restrict applicability by normative context, which is again a participant/context at-tribute (Case 1). More generally, any exception not falling into Cases 1–4 would need to modify some aspect of R other than its participants, its temporal scope, its confidence, or its causal context. But these four aspects— who/what , when , how certain , and why/why not —exhaust the structural dimensions of a knowledge claim. An exception that modifies none of these aspects does not actually constrain R and is therefore not an exception. □

22 8 Computational Complexity 

8.1 Hardness Results 

Theorem 8.1 (Intractability) . 1. General hypergraph pattern matching: NP-complete 2. Unbounded causal chain queries: PSPACE-complete 3. Optimal consolidation: NP-hard Proof sketch. (1) By reduction from subgraph isomorphism: given a pattern hypergraph P and data hypergraph D, finding an embedding P , → D generalizes the NP-complete subgraph iso-morphism problem on ordinary graphs. (2) Unbounded causal chains require exploring paths of arbitrary length through ≺; the reachability problem over configurations with temporal and confidence constraints reduces from quantified Boolean formula satisfiability. (3) Opti-mal consolidation—selecting the maximum-confidence consistent subset of hyperedges under temporal constraints—reduces from weighted MAX-SAT. □

8.2 Tractable Fragment 

Theorem 8.2 (Tractable Fragment) . The following query class is in PTIME: 

• α-acyclic hyperedge patterns 

• Fixed-depth causal chains ( d constant) 

• Bounded temporal windows 

• Confidence thresholds Proof sketch. α-acyclic hyperedge patterns, the standard acyclicity notion for database tractabil-ity [21], admit Yannakakis-style join-tree evaluation in O(n · | E|) where n is the pattern size and |E| is the number of hyperedges. Fixed-depth causal chains require at most d joins along 

≺, each filterable by temporal range containment (using index-supported interval queries) and confidence thresholds (simple arithmetic comparisons). Bounded temporal windows restrict the working set via range predicates on τv, supported by standard B-tree or GiST indices. The composition of these polynomial-time operations remains polynomial. □

Most practical queries satisfy these constraints, making our framework efficient for real work-loads. 

Remark 8.3 (Predicate Pushdown) . The polynomial bound in Theorem 8.2 assumes that tem-poral and confidence predicates are evaluated before structural joins, not after. In practice, this is enforced by predicate pushdown: because τv is indexed via GiST and κ is a scalar column, the query planner filters the working set aggressively at the leaf level of the join tree before any structural pattern matching begins. Without pushdown, intermediate working sets during Yan-nakakis evaluation could grow large in highly connected hypergraphs even for α-acyclic patterns; with pushdown, the working set at each join step is bounded by the selectivity of the temporal window and confidence threshold. 

23 Remark 8.4 (Confidence-Driven Depth Termination) . The fixed-depth constraint ( d constant) in Theorem 8.2 may appear restrictive: in root-cause analysis, users rarely know the exact causal depth in advance. However, the uncertainty propagation rules (Theorem 7.5) provide a natural termination criterion. Because joint confidence degrades multiplicatively along causal chains— 

κchain = κ(e1)·Q 

> i

κ≺(ei, e i+1 )—the accumulated confidence eventually drops below any relevance threshold θ. The traversal engine can terminate dynamically when κchain < θ , bounding the effective depth to def f ≤ ⌈ log κmin θ⌉ where κmin is the minimum per-link confidence. This makes the depth bound data-driven rather than user-specified, while preserving the polynomial-time guarantee. 

# 9 Prototype Implementation 

To demonstrate that the theoretical framework admits a practical realization, we implemented a prototype of the ATCH model as a PostgreSQL extension written in C. The prototype integrates with the database engine’s query execution, indexing, and type system, and validates that the complexity bounds of Section 8 are achievable using standard database infrastructure. This section describes the prototype’s external interface; a detailed systems paper with performance benchmarks is in preparation. Concretely, the extension satisfies all four pillars—and therefore the Equivalence Theorem (Theorem 6.3)—by providing a uniform API that realizes each of the five first-class operations of Definition 4.7: Store and Retrieve via UUID-keyed hyperedges, Query via predicate-rich SQL operators, Compose via the causal_link relation, and Return via first-class result sets. The subsections below detail how each pillar is concretely realized. 

9.1 Storage Model 

The extension represents each pillar as a native database construct rather than an application-layer convention. The logical storage model exposes hyperedges as first-class database objects:                                                      

> CREATE TABLE hyperedge (id UUID PRIMARY KEY , nodes TEXT [] NOT NULL , --P1 : N - ary via arrays
> attributes JSONB , --P1 : Flexible attributes
> valid_time TSTZRANGE NOT NULL , --P2 : Temporal validity
> confidence FLOAT --P3 : Uncertainty
> CHECK ( confidence >= 0AND confidence <= 1) ) ; CREATE TABLE causal_link (--P4 : Relationships between
> cause_id UUID REFERENCES hyperedge ( id ) , --relationships
> effect_id UUID REFERENCES hyperedge ( id ) , mechanism TEXT ) ;

The mapping to the four pillars is direct: P1 is realized by the nodes array (arbitrary arity) and attributes JSONB (flexible properties); P2 by the valid_time range type with native temporal containment operators; P3 by the confidence scalar with check constraint κ ∈

[0 , 1] ; and P4 by the causal_link table whose foreign keys connect hyperedges to hyperedges. While the logical schema is expressible in standard SQL, the C extension provides optimized implementations of the core operations that go beyond what SQL-level workarounds can achieve. 24 9.2 API Surface 

The extension exposes four core operations as native PostgreSQL functions: 

• atch.at_time(t) : Time-travel queries returning the complete knowledge state as of times-tamp t, resolving temporal validity across all hyperedges. 

• atch.trace_causal_chain(target, depth) : Causal chain traversal from a target hyper-edge, returning the full causal history with per-link confidence scores up to the specified depth. 

• atch.propagate_confidence(chain) : Computes joint confidence along a causal chain using the propagation rules of Theorem 7.5, including contextual modification from N-ary attributes. 

• atch.discover_hidden_context(cluster_a, cluster_b) : Automated hidden variable discovery implementing Theorem 7.17. Given two contradictory hyperedge clusters (identi-fied by UUID arrays), the function computes information gain across all JSONB attributes and returns the attribute that best partitions the clusters—the hidden context variable z

whose identification resolves the apparent contradiction. The core entropy computation is implemented in C for performance, requiring a single O(N · m) pass over N observations with m attributes. These operations are accessible from standard SQL queries, allowing the ATCH framework to interoperate with existing PostgreSQL tooling, ORMs, and application code. 

9.3 Complexity Validation 

The prototype confirms that the tractable fragment identified in Theorem 8.2 achieves the expected complexity bounds using standard PostgreSQL indexing infrastructure: 

• Point lookups: O(1) via B-tree index on hyperedge identifiers 

• Time-travel queries: O(log n) via GiST index on temporal range columns 

• Causal chain traversal (depth d): O(n · d) with optimized graph traversal 

• Confidence propagation: Computed inline during causal traversal with negligible overhead The choice of PostgreSQL as the host system is deliberate: it provides ACID guarantees, ma-ture indexing (B-tree, GiST, GIN), a robust extension API, and broad ecosystem compatibility. The extension adds the capabilities that PostgreSQL’s SQL layer cannot express natively— first-class hyperedge operations, temporal-causal queries, and confidence propagation—without requiring users to abandon their existing database infrastructure. Detailed performance bench-marks comparing against existing systems are a direction for future work. 

# 10 Expressiveness Benchmarks 

✓= native, ◦ = workaround, × = impossible 

Q7 in our framework (native): 

25 Table 1: Benchmark Query Expressiveness                                                                      

> QQuery PSQL LPG TypeDB Ours
> 13-way meeting with attribute 1××✓✓
> 2Status of X on date D 2◦××✓
> 3Relationships with κ > 0.83◦◦×✓
> 4What caused relationship R? 4××◦✓
> 5Propagate κthrough chain 3,4 ×××✓
> 6Relationships valid in interval I 1,2 ◦××✓
> 7Causal history at time T with κAll ×××✓
> SELECT atch . trace_causal_chain ( target := ’ malpractice_finding ’ , as_of := ’ 2024 -08 -15 ’ , compute_confidence := true ) ;
> --Returns : prescription (0.73) - -[0.89] - - > reaction (0.95) --- -[0.78] - - > finding (0.62) --Chain confidence : 0.51

Definition 10.1 (Query Expressibility) . Query Q is expressible in system K iff there exists a query q in K’s language such that q(D) = Q(D) for all databases D.

Theorem 10.2 (Strict Expressiveness Hierarchy) .

SQL ⊊ LPG ⊊ TypeDB ⊊ ATCH Proof. We prove each strict separation with a witness query. 

SQL ⊊ LPG: Witness Q1 = “return the edge connecting nodes a and b, with the edge’s own properties and identity, such that the result can be used as input to a subsequent traversal step.” In LPG, edges are first-class objects with persistent identity: MATCH (a)-[r]->(b) RETURN r 

returns r as an object that carries its own properties and can participate in further pattern matches. In SQL, the closest equivalent is a join across a junction table, but the result is a 

derived row —it has no persistent identity independent of its component foreign keys, cannot carry properties that are intrinsic to the relationship (as opposed to columns that happen to be in the same row), and cannot be referenced as an argument in a subsequent join without reconstructing the key tuple. The separation is not about computability of result values but about whether the data model assigns structural identity to edges: SQL’s relational model treats relationships as derived from tuple co-occurrence; LPG’s model treats them as named, typed objects. Containment: every SQL table embeds as a set of disconnected nodes with properties in LPG. 

LPG ⊊ TypeDB: Witness Q2 = “3-way relationships with attribute”. LPG edges con-nect exactly 2 nodes; 3-way requires reification (changes semantics). TypeDB native via n-ary relations. 

TypeDB ⊊ our framework: Witness Q3 = “relationships valid at t with κ > 0.8”. TypeDB lacks temporal validity and confidence semantics. These would be data attributes, not metadata—semantically different and without propagation. Each separation is strict: witnesses are inexpressible without structural distortion —the target system can compute equivalent result sets only through encodings that alter the data model (reification, schema duplication, or loss of metadata semantics). □

Figure 4 visualizes this strict containment chain with the witness queries and pillar support at each level. 26 Table 2: System Comparison Summary 

System P1 P2 P3 P4 FC Complete? SQL × ◦ × × × No LPG (Neo4j) × ◦ × × ◦ No RDF/OWL ◦ × × ◦ ◦ No TypeDB ✓ × × ◦ ✓ No 

Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes SQL LPG 

> (Neo4j)

TypeDB ATCH                                   

> (Ours)
> ⊊⊊⊊
> Witness: first-class path results
> Witness: 3-way relationships
> Witness: temporal validity + confidence
> P1: ×P2: ◦
> P3: ×P4: ×
> P1: ×P2: ◦
> P3: ×P4: ◦
> P1: ✓P2: ×
> P3: ×P4: ◦
> P1: ✓P2: ✓
> P3: ✓P4: ✓
> ✓= native support ◦= workaround possible ×= inexpressible

Figure 4: Strict expressiveness hierarchy with witness queries and pillar support. Each system is strictly less expressive than its successor. Only the ATCH framework natively supports all four pillars. 

# 11 Information-Theoretic Analysis 

We quantify information loss when projecting our framework to lower-expressiveness models (Figure 1 illustrates the structural ambiguity introduced by binary projection). 

Definition 11.1 (Binary Projection) . π2 : H → G maps hyperedge {v1, . . . , v n} to clique 

{(vi, v j ) : i < j }.

Definition 11.2 (Reconstruction Ambiguity) . The reconstruction ambiguity A(H, π 2) is the minimum number of bits required to recover the original hypergraph H from its binary projection 

π2(H).

Theorem 11.3 (Information Loss Bound) . For hypergraph H with average arity ¯n > 2:

A(H, π 2) ≥ |E| · 

¯n

2



bits Proof. Consider hyperedge e with n nodes. Under π2, e maps to a clique of  n

> 2

 binary edges. The inverse mapping π−12 must determine: did these edges originate from (a) one n-ary hyperedge, or (b)  n

> 2

 independent binary relationships, or (c) some combination? Without additional information, all 2(n

> 2

) subsets of binary edges are possible origins. The minimum description length to resolve this ambiguity is  n

> 2

 bits per hyperedge (one bit per binary edge, indicating whether it belongs to the original hyperedge). Summing over all hyperedges with individual arities n1, n 2, . . . , n |E| :

A ≥ 

> |E|

X

> i=1

ni

2



Since  n

> 2

 = n(n − 1) /2 is convex in n for n ≥ 2, Jensen’s inequality gives: 

1

|E| 

> |E|

X

> i=1

ni

2



≥

¯n

2



27 where ¯n = 1

> |E|

P 

> i

ni is the average arity. Multiplying both sides by |E| :

A ≥ |E| · 

¯n

2



This bound is tight when hyperedges have uniform arity. □

Theorem 11.3 quantifies the minimum cost of using a binary system; Proposition 11.5 below extends this to systems missing arbitrary subsets of pillars. 

Corollary 11.4 (Irreversibility) . Binary projection is not information-preserving: in general, 

π−12 (π2(H)) ̸ = H.

Proposition 11.5 (Total Expressiveness Gap) . Information lost when representing ATCH H

in a system lacking pillars S is bounded by: 

∆H(S) ≤ X

> Pi∈S

Hi(H)

where H1 = structural, H2 = temporal, H3 = confidence, H4 = causal entropy. 

Remark 11.6. The bound is an inequality rather than an equality because the Equivalence Theorem establishes mutual entailment among the pillars, implying potential correlations between the entropy components. When pillars are lost independently (e.g., a system supports structure but not time), the additive bound holds; when multiple pillars are lost simultaneously, shared information between them may reduce the actual loss below the sum. The bound quantifies the worst-case “price” of using an incomplete system. 

# 12 Discussion 

12.1 Representational Coverage Across Knowledge Types 

The four pillars define the structural dimensions of knowledge: what is involved (P1), when it holds (P2), how certain it is (P3), and what caused it (P4). Domain-specific semantics live inside this structure as attributes. The pillars do not constrain what you store—they guarantee the container preserves everything about it. To substantiate this claim, we systematically examine how diverse knowledge types map to the framework (Table 3). In each case, the four pillars provide the structural scaffolding while attributes carry domain-specific meaning. The pattern is consistent: the four pillars provide the dimensions, and attributes carry the semantics. Modal force, spatial geometry, normative weight, vagueness degree, analogy strength—these are all attributes of relationships. The pillars ensure those attributes have a place to live (P1), a time range (P2), a confidence level (P3), and connections to other knowledge (P4). 

Remark 12.1 (Representational vs. Computational Completeness) . The framework claims rep-resentational completeness: any knowledge can be faithfully stored and retrieved without struc-tural distortion. Domain-specific reasoning —probabilistic inference, spatial computation, deontic logic checking—requires additional computational machinery operating over the stored represen-tation. The framework is the storage layer, not the inference engine. 

28 12.2 Implications for AI 

The Equivalence Theorem has direct consequences for several active areas of AI research. The four pillars characterize what knowledge requires structurally; any AI system that stores, re-trieves, or reasons about knowledge inherits these requirements whether or not it satisfies them. Beyond the classical problems addressed in earlier sections (the Frame Problem in Section 7.1, conflict resolution in Section 7.3, and common sense reasoning in Section 7.4), the framework addresses structural limitations in modern AI systems. 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). Current RAG pipelines retrieve documents by semantic similarity, then feed text chunks to language models for reasoning. This archi-tecture inherits the limitations of the underlying storage: documents are unstructured text, and similarity search cannot recover relational structure. A query may retrieve the ticket de-scribing a printing failure without surfacing the driver change three weeks prior that set the conditions for it—because the causal link exists only implicitly across documents. The frame-work provides a structured alternative: instead of retrieving similar text, an AI system can query relationships directly, following causal chains (P4), filtering by temporal validity (P2), and ranking by confidence (P3). The retrieval problem shifts from “find similar documents” to “find relevant relationships,” which is a fundamentally different and more expressive operation. Recent work on HyperGraphRAG [13] independently validates this direction, demonstrating that hypergraph-structured knowledge retrieval outperforms binary graph-based approaches across multiple domains—precisely because binary knowledge graphs cannot represent n-ary relations. 

Neuro-Symbolic Integration. The neuro-symbolic AI community is actively seeking ap-propriate symbolic representation layers to complement neural perception and language capa-bilities. Most current approaches use knowledge graphs [26] with binary edges, which this paper proves are formally incomplete (Theorem 10.2). If a neuro-symbolic system’s symbolic compo-nent cannot represent n-ary relationships, temporal validity, uncertainty, or causal links between relationships, it will lose information at the symbolic boundary regardless of how capable the neural component is. The Equivalence Theorem provides a formal specification for what the symbolic layer must contain: first-class relationships with the four pillars are both necessary and sufficient for structurally complete symbolic representation. 

Hypergraph Systems. Hypergraphs have long been recognized in the research literature as the appropriate mathematical foundation for modeling complex relationships [4]. However, practical implementations remain scarce. Existing hypergraph research focuses primarily on structural properties—community detection, partitioning, spectral analysis—without addressing temporal validity, uncertainty quantification, or causal relationships between hyperedges. The ATCH framework bridges this gap by extending hypergraphs with exactly the capabilities needed for structurally complete representation. This suggests a path from theoretical hypergraph research to practical knowledge systems: augment hyperedges with temporal bounds, confidence scores, and causal ordering, and the resulting structure is provably sufficient for representing any relational knowledge. 

Persistent AI Memory. Large language models currently lack persistent memory across conversations. Context windows are finite, and information from prior interactions is lost unless explicitly re-injected. The framework offers a formally grounded architecture for AI memory: re-lationships stored with temporal validity naturally represent knowledge that was true at one time but not another (P2), knowledge held with varying degrees of confidence as evidence accumulates (P3), and knowledge about what caused what across interactions (P4). While integration with language models remains an engineering challenge, the framework provides the representational guarantees that a persistent memory system requires—ensuring that stored knowledge retains its full relational structure over time. 

Explainability. A persistent challenge in AI systems is answering “why did this happen?” Most current approaches to explainability attempt to reconstruct reasoning post-hoc—analyzing attention weights, computing feature attributions, or generating natural language justifications 29 after a decision has been made. If causal relationships are stored as first-class objects, explain-ability becomes a query rather than a reconstruction. The causal chain e1 ≺ e2 ≺ e3 with associated confidence scores provides a native audit trail: the system can directly answer “what caused this outcome?” by traversing ≺ rather than approximating an explanation from opaque internal states. 

Privacy-Preserving Knowledge Aggregation. When knowledge systems are deployed across organizational boundaries—multiple hospitals, financial institutions, or managed service providers—cross-deployment pattern detection requires aggregating knowledge without expos-ing private data. The four pillars enable a clean structure/instance separation that binary graph representations cannot achieve. A hyperedge with explicit participant roles (P1) can be pro-jected into a structural pattern signature —retaining the relationship type, participant types, and role structure while discarding all entity identifiers and property values—in a single well-defined operation. In a binary graph, the same relationship is distributed across multiple edges with no clean boundary between structural pattern and instance data, making anonymization heuristic rather than principled. Pillar 3 provides a second structural advantage: because every hyperedge carries a confidence value κ ∈ [0 , 1] , patterns can be characterized by aggregate con-fidence statistics that summarize the evidence across multiple observations without preserving individual instances. Exporting these aggregate statistics rather than raw data makes the ab-straction inherent in the representation rather than imposed post-hoc. Pillar 2 enables consent withdrawal : because every hyperedge carries temporal bounds, a deployment that withdraws from knowledge sharing can have its contributions cleanly subtracted from aggregate confidence scores by time window, without recomputation from raw data. Pillar 4 enables sharing of causal topology —“change type A causes failure type B through component type C”—without revealing which specific entities participated, because causal links connect typed hyperedges rather than identified entities. Together, these properties suggest that the ATCH framework is not merely one possible foundation for federated knowledge systems, but the structurally necessary one: it provides the minimal representation that supports both complete knowledge and principled privacy boundaries simultaneously. 

12.3 Limitations 

• General hypergraph queries remain NP-complete; practical systems must restrict to tractable fragments (Section 8) 

• Domain-specific reasoning (probabilistic inference, spatial computation, deontic checking) requires computational extensions beyond the storage layer—the framework is representa-tionally complete, not inferentially complete 

• Complex joint probability distributions are storable as attributes but lack native propa-gation semantics; integration with Bayesian inference engines is complementary 

• The Equivalence Theorem establishes that the four pillars are necessary for completeness but does not claim they are sufficient for all computational tasks over stored knowledge 

• Migration from existing systems requires data transformation; the cost of transformation is an engineering concern not addressed by the theoretical framework 30 13 Conclusion 

We have proved that structurally complete knowledge representation requires exactly four capabilities— n-ary relationships with attributes, temporal validity, uncertainty quantification, and causal relationships—and that these four are mutually entailing: any system implementing one neces-sarily requires all four, and all four are equivalent to treating relationships as first-class objects. The Equivalence Theorem establishes a strict expressiveness hierarchy SQL ⊊ LPG ⊊

TypeDB ⊊ ATCH, with witness queries that are structurally inexpressible at each lower level. As direct corollaries, the four pillars yield solutions to classical AI problems—the Frame Prob-lem, conflict resolution with hidden variable discovery, uncertainty propagation through causal chains, and common sense reasoning with exceptions—not as separate mechanisms but as nat-ural consequences of the representational structure. Systematic examination of diverse knowledge types (modal, spatial, procedural, normative, counterfactual, analogical, and others) confirms that the four pillars provide the structural di-mensions while domain-specific semantics live in attributes. The Qualification Completeness Theorem (Theorem 7.23) further establishes that all common sense exceptions are expressible along these dimensions. The computational cost of completeness is bounded: while general hypergraph queries are NP-complete, the tractable fragment covering practical query classes—acyclic patterns, bounded-depth causal chains, windowed temporal queries—runs in polynomial time. A proto-type PostgreSQL extension in C confirms these bounds are achievable using standard database infrastructure. The central insight is that first-class relationships are not one feature among many but a structural threshold : below it, information loss is unavoidable and compounds with every operation; above it, the full spectrum of knowledge representation becomes available. More broadly, the Equivalence Theorem characterizes not what databases require but what knowledge 

requires: any system that accumulates beliefs from uncertain observations over time—whether a database, an AI agent, a sensor network, or a scientific instrument—needs these four capabilities for its beliefs to be structurally faithful to the domain it models. An accompanying Lean 4 formalization provides machine-checked proofs of the core results: the Binary Decomposition Failure lemma, all five equivalence lemmas (FC ⇒ P1–P4 and each Pi ⇒ FC), the main Equivalence Theorem, the All-or-Nothing Corollary, the Frame Problem persistence theorem (including persistence under arbitrary action sequences), and the expres-siveness hierarchy. The formalization compiles with zero errors under Lean 4 v4.14.0 and is available at https://github.com/Network-Services-Group/equivalence-theorem-lean4 .Several directions remain for future work. First, empirical validation : the reference imple-mentation (Section 9) provides a starting point, but systematic benchmarks comparing ATCH query performance against SQL, LPG, and TypeDB workloads on real-world datasets would strengthen the practical case. Second, domain-specific case studies : applying ATCH to specific verticals (clinical data, supply chain, IT infrastructure) would demonstrate the framework’s emergence properties and identify practical optimization opportunities. The reference imple-mentation and benchmark suite will be released as an open-source repository upon completion. 

# Acknowledgments 

The author used Claude (Anthropic) as an AI research assistant during the development of this work. AI assistance was used for mathematical formalization, literature review, and manuscript preparation. All theoretical contributions, research direction, domain expertise, proof validation, and final editorial decisions were made by the author, who takes full responsibility for the accuracy and integrity of the content. 31 References 

[1] J. F. Allen. Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals. Comm. ACM , 26(11):832–843, 1983. [2] R. Angles. The property graph database model. In Proc. AMW , CEUR Workshop Proceed-ings, vol. 2100, 2018. [3] R. Angles, A. Bonifati, S. Dumbrava, G. Fletcher, A. Green, J. Hidders, B. Li, L. Libkin, V. Marsault, W. Martens, F. Murlak, S. Plantikow, O. Savković, M. Schmidt, J. Sequeda, S. Staworko, D. Tomaszuk, H. Voigt, D. Vrgoc, M. Wu, and D. Zivkovic. PG-Schema: Schemas for property graphs. Proc. ACM Manag. Data , 1(2):198:1–198:25, 2023. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3589778 

[4] R. J. Brachman and H. J. Levesque. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning . Morgan Kaufmann, 2004. [5] E. F. Codd. A relational model of data for large shared data banks. Comm. ACM , 13(6):377– 387, 1970. [6] J. McCarthy and P. J. Hayes. Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence. Machine Intelligence , 4:463–502, 1969. [7] R. Reiter. A logic for default reasoning. Artificial Intelligence , 13(1-2):81–132, 1980. [8] J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference . Cambridge University Press, 2009. [9] R. T. Snodgrass. Developing Time-Oriented Database Applications in SQL . Morgan Kauf-mann, 2000. [10] D. Suciu, D. Olteanu, C. Ré, and C. Koch. Probabilistic Databases . Morgan & Claypool, 2011. [11] ISO/IEC. ISO/IEC 39075:2024 — Information technology — Database languages — GQL. International Organization for Standardization, 2024. https://www.iso.org/standard/ 76120.html 

[12] ISO/IEC. ISO/IEC 9075-16:2023 — Information technology — Database languages — SQL — Part 16: Property Graph Queries (SQL/PGQ). International Organization for Standard-ization, 2023. https://www.iso.org/standard/79473.html 

[13] H. Luo, H. E, G. Chen, Y. Zheng, X. Wu, Y. Guo, Q. Lin, Y. Feng, Z. Kuang, M. Song, Y. Zhu, and A. T. Luu. HyperGraphRAG: Retrieval-augmented generation via hypergraph-structured knowledge representation. In Proc. NeurIPS , 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2503.21322 

[14] R. Reiter. Knowledge in Action: Logical Foundations for Specifying and Implementing Dy-namical Systems . MIT Press, 2001. [15] R. Kowalski and M. Sergot. A logic-based calculus of events. New Generation Computing ,4(1):67–95, 1986. [16] F. Bacchus, J. Y. Halpern, and H. J. Levesque. Reasoning about noisy sensors and effectors in the situation calculus. Artificial Intelligence , 111(1-2):171–208, 1999. [17] F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, D. Nardi, and P. F. Patel-Schneider, editors. 

The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and Applications . Cambridge University Press, 2003. 32 [18] A. Artale, E. Franconi, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. A temporal description logic for reasoning over conceptual schemas and queries. In Proc. JELIA , LNAI 2424, pages 98–110. Springer, 2002. [19] A. Artale, R. Kontchakov, A. Kovtunova, V. Ryzhikov, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. Ontology-mediated query answering over temporal data: A survey. In Proc. TIME , LIPIcs vol. 90, pages 1:1–1:37, 2017. [20] T. Lukasiewicz. Expressive probabilistic description logics. Artificial Intelligence , 172(6-7):852–883, 2008. [21] C. Berge. Hypergraphs: Combinatorics of Finite Sets . North-Holland, 1989. [22] S. Abiteboul and R. Hull. Data functions, Datalog, and negation. In Proc. ACM SIGMOD ,pages 143–153, 1988. [23] C. S. Jensen and R. T. Snodgrass. Temporal data management. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , 11(1):36–44, 1999. [24] N. Francis, A. Gheerbrant, P. Guagliardo, L. Libkin, V. Marsault, W. Martens, F. Murlak, L. Peterfreund, A. Rogova, and D. Vrgoc. GPC: A pattern calculus for property graphs. In 

Proc. PODS , pages 241–250, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1145/3584372.3588662 

[25] A. Deutsch, N. Francis, A. Green, K. Hare, B. Li, L. Libkin, T. Lindaaker, V. Marsault, W. Martens, J. Michels, F. Murlak, S. Plantikow, P. Selmer, O. van Rest, H. Voigt, D. Vrgoc, M. Wu, and F. Zemke. Graph pattern matching in GQL and SQL/PGQ. In Proc. SIGMOD ,pages 2246–2258, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3526057 

[26] A. Hogan, E. Blomqvist, M. Cochez, C. d’Amato, G. de Melo, C. Gutierrez, S. Kirrane, J. E. L. Gayo, R. Navigli, S. Neumaier, A.-C. Ngonga Ngomo, A. Polleres, S. M. Rashid, A. Rula, L. Schmelzeisen, J. Sequeda, S. Staab, and A. Zimmermann. Knowledge graphs. 

ACM Computing Surveys , 54(4):71:1–71:37, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447772 

[27] K. Ahrabian, E. Boxer, and J. Pujara. Toward better temporal structures for geopolitical events forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00430 , 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601. 00430 

[28] S. Sadoughi, N. Yakovets, and G. Fletcher. Meta-property graphs: Extending property graphs with metadata awareness and reification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13813 , 2024. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13813 

# A Modal Logic Extensions 

The core framework can be extended to handle modal operators: 

Definition A.1 (Modal Confidence) . Extend κ with qualifiers: 

• κ□(e): Confidence that e is necessarily true 

• κ⋄(e): Confidence that e is possibly true 

This preserves the Equivalence Theorem: modal qualifiers are attributes of the relationship, requiring first-class status. 33 Table 3: Representational Coverage Across Knowledge Types 

Knowledge Type Example Encoding 

Factual “Tech pushed the print driver” Relationship with participants and attributes (P1) Modal “The server possibly 

failed” Attribute modality: possible ;

κ = 0 .3 reflects degree of possibility (P1, P3) Spatial “Server A is adjacent to B in the rack” {A, B, Rack} with distance_m: 0.5 (P1) Procedural “How to roll back a GPO change” Causal chain: Step 1 ≺ Step 2 ≺

Step 3, each a relationship with tem-poral ordering (P2, P4) Normative “Test GPO impact before pushing drivers” {Tech, GPO, Driver} with 

obligation: should and tempo-ral validity of the policy (P1, P2) Counterfactual “If we hadn’t pushed that driver. . . ” Relationship with type: counterfactual referencing the causal chain (P1, P4) Analogical “This outage is like the March one” Relationship between two relation-ships with similarity: 0.8 (P1, P4) Negative “No malware found” {Scan, Device, Malware} with 

result: absent , κ = 0.99 ,bounded τ (P1, P2, P3) Aggregate “Most clients on subnet have latency” Higher-order relationship over a pat-tern with ratio: 0.73 (P1, P4) Identity “DB-Prod-1 is Legacy-SQL-3” {Name 1, Name 2} with relation: identity , temporal bounds for when the identity holds (P1, P2) Vague “The server is kind of slow” {Server, Performance} with 

degree: 0.6 —vagueness as aproperty of the knowledge, not uncertainty about it (P1) Temporal pat-tern “Always crashes after up-dates” Causal link Update ≺ Crash with 

frequency: always, count: 12 (P1, P4) Deontic “Tech is authorized to restart” {Tech, Server, Restart} with 

permission: authorized , τ for validity window (P1, P2) Institutional “Counts as Severity 1” {Incident, Classification} with 

rule: policy describing why (P1, P4) Metacognitive “We don’t know if backup succeeded” {System, Knowledge-Gap, Backup} with gap: outcome_unknown , κ =0.5 (P1, P3, P4) Indexical “The current primary server” {Server, Role, Primary} with τ =[start, ∞); “current” resolved by temporal query (P2) 

34