Title: Novel Table Search [Technical Report]

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07235v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:48:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Novel Table Search [Technical Report] 

1st Besat Kassaie 

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science University of Waterloo 

Canada bkassaie@uwaterloo.ca 

2nd Ren´ ee J. Miller 

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science University of Waterloo 

Canada rjmiller@uwaterloo.ca 

Abstract —Avoiding redundancy in query results has been extensively studied in relational databases and information retrieval, yet its implications for data lakes remain largely unexplored. We bridge this gap by investigating how to discover unionable tables that contribute new information for a given query table in large-scale data lakes. We formally define Novel Table Search ( NTS ) as the problem of finding tables that are novel with respect to a given query table and identify two desirable properties that any scoring function for NTS should satisfy. We introduce a concrete scoring mechanism designed to maximize syntactic novelty, prove that it satisfies the proposed properties, and show that the associated optimization problem is NP-hard. To address this challenge, we develop an efficient approximation technique based on penalization, i.e., Attribute-Based Novel Table Search ( ANTs ). We propose three additional 

NTS variants to achieve syntactic novelty and introduce two evaluation metrics for syntactic novelty. Through extensive exper-iments, we demonstrate that ANTs outperforms other methods in capturing syntactic novelty across evaluation metrics and various benchmarks, while also achieving the lowest execution time. 

Index Terms —Data lakes, Table Search, Novelty 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

There is a well-established line of research focused on de-veloping techniques for discovering and retrieving targeted in-formation from vast collections of datasets, i.e., data lakes [1]– [12]. Some methods allow users to search for relevant datasets by expressing requirements through keywords, while others enable users to expand their query tables either vertically (by adding more attributes) or horizontally (by adding more tuples) to support downstream data analysis tasks. These methods use a variety of relevance metrics to evaluate how relevant a dataset or table is for a query and typically do not consider novelty or diversity of results. Diversity is typically understood as a coverage or breadth requirement while novelty means avoiding redundancy or duplication in the results [13]. This oversight may have negative impact on both data utiliza-tion and decision-making quality. As an example, consider a physician analyzing a dataset to study the side effects of a medication on a patient population. If the discovered tables from the data lake are relevant, but only contain patients with the same characteristics as the patients in a query table, the analysis may become skewed by neglecting other segments of the population. This arises because relevance metrics are typically based on a variety of similarity metrics (including syntactic measures like set-overlap and semantic measures like word-embedding or table-embedding similarity) [12]. In many applications, users want relevant answers that contain novel information and where different answers are diverse. Consider a data market [14], [15] where a data buyer wants unionable tables. Since each table has an acquisition cost, she will often prefer to spend money on tables that are unionable, but that contain the most new information and when buying multiple tables, she will want a diverse or varied set of tables, meaning they are novel with respect to the query table and each other. Given a query table, the goal of unionable table search is to identify the most unionable tables from a data lake [1]. Two tables are considered unionable if they share attributes with similar semantics indicating the union of the two tables is semantically meaningful [1]. More recent work considers tables unionable if they share attributes with similar semantics and the relationship between attributes or table context is similar [2], [11]. A common approach is to compute similarity between attributes using syntactic features (e.g., observed values) and between semantic representations (e.g., embed-dings) [1], [16]. Consequently, the most trivially unionable table for a query table would be the table itself. However, identifying novel unionable tables introduces a new twist: we seek tables that are sufficiently similar to support union operations, yet dissimilar enough to introduce novelty. In this work, we formally define Novel Table Search ( NTS ) as the problem of finding unionable tables that are novel with respect to a given query table. We define NTS as a reranking step (Step 2 in Figure 1) that operates on the output of a unionable-table search system. Given an initial set of candidate tables that are unionable with the query table, NTS selects those that are most novel. We define a specific novelty measure for NTS that is based on syntactic novelty that penalizes tables that contain duplicate (redundant) data (while still having novelty). We propose several techniques for solving NTS , each employing a different strategy, and evaluate both their ability to capture syntactic novelty and their efficiency. 

ANTs is designed expressly to maximize novelty and minimize duplicates in tables; GMC is a method originally developed for query-result diversification [17] that we adapt to target syntactic novelty; ER an entity-centric approach that maximizes entity-resolution distance with the goal of returning tables containing novel entities; and SemNov an approach that maximizes table semantic distance. To illustrate, we walk through an example. 

> arXiv:2603.07235v1 [cs.DB] 7 Mar 2026

Fig. 1: Given a query table Q, NTS takes as input k unionable tables from Step 1 ( |S| = k) and selects the l most novel tables ( |R| = l)using a novelty-aware scoring function. If the search method lacks built-in attribute alignment, an external aligner is applied. 

Example 1.1: Figure 2(a-c) illustrates portions of three tables in the ugen-v2 dataset [18]. Ugen-v2 is a recent table unionability benchmark. The user wishes to expand the query table Q (Figure 2a), which contains information about artwork, by adding additional rows. She submits Q to a unionable table search system and retrieves a ranked list of k

candidate tables. Among the benchmark candidates, the most unionable table has significant overlap with the query table. Our reranking component ( ANTs ) then ranks T1 (Figure 2b) as the most novel unionable table and T2 (Figure 2c) in seventh place. ANTs (Section IV), identifies unionable tables by balancing high unionability with strong novelty. Notice that T1 is more unionable with the query table (sharing five attributes) and novel (while the values in Medium overlap with the query table, other values in Artwork and Artist 

are syntactically different. Here T2 is less unionable (only two unionable attributes) and has more Artist overlap than T1.

This paper makes the following key contributions: 

• We formally define the problem of identifying novel union-able tables, denoted NTS , and specify two general properties that any novelty-aware scoring function gscore should satisfy in the context of unionable table discovery. 

• We propose a concrete syntactic scoring function, denoted 

nscore , that satisfies the above properties. For this scoring function, we prove that the associated optimization problem is NP-hard. 

• We propose a new attribute-based approximation algorithm, 

ANTs , to efficiently address NTS .

• We develop three additional techniques. Two methods are based on the syntactic novelty measure: GMC , an adaptation of an existing method, and ER , an entity-based technique, and 

SemNov , a new semantic novelty measure that we empirically evaluate to assess how well maximizing semantic novelty yields high syntactic novelty. 

• We demonstrate that ANTs also improves performance on a downstream machine learning task. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II introduces notation. Section III presents our scoring framework and outlines key properties essential for effective novelty scoring. In Section IV, we describe our proposed approximation algorithm ANTs for efficiently identifying syn-tactically novel tables. Section V introduces the baselines and the various methods developed for comparison. Section VI discusses the evaluation metrics developed to assess syntactic novelty and performance. Section VII provides details on the experimental setup, datasets, and a comprehensive analysis of results. 1 Section VIII presents the application of ANTs to a downstream machine learning task. Section IX reviews related work, and finally, Section X concludes the paper and outlines future research directions. Detailed proofs and extended results are provided in the Appendix. II. P RELIMINARIES 

We represent a data lake as a collection (set) of tables denoted as T . We represent the schema of a table T ∈ T 

as T (A1, . . . , A n). With a slight abuse of notation, for a table 

T (A1, . . . , A n), we use T (without explicitly listing attributes) to refer to a table instance that conforms to the schema, Ak ∈ T

to refer to an attribute (column) of T (equivalent to projecting the table T on attribute Ak), and X ⊆ T (A1, . . . , A n) to refer to a subset of attributes in T (A1, . . . , A n). We denote the domain of attribute Ai by Di, that is, T ⊆ D1 × . . . × Dn.We write t ∈ T for a tuple in T which is denoted as 

t = ⟨v1, . . . , v n⟩. Throughout the paper, we assume that all data lake tables and query tables are non-empty. We adopt a slight deviation from the traditional relational model by allowing tables to be multisets (bags) instead of strict sets since this is common in real data lakes. Throughout this paper, unless explicitly stated otherwise, all set operations and relational operations over tables are interpreted in the context of multisets. For example, the projection operator π is multiset projection and can therefore produce duplicate tuples. Specifically, when referring to the union of two relations T and 

T ′, we assume it to be the multiset union (bag union), denoted as T ∪ T ′. In a multiset, it is possible for two tuples to have identical values for all attributes. For notational convenience, we may assume that each tuple has a unique identifier to distinguish it from others. To perform the union on two unionable data lake tables (which may have different attribute names), we use alignments as defined by Nargesian et al. [1]. 

Definition 1: An alignment A(T, T ′) is a one-to-one map-ping from X to Y where X ⊆ T (A1, . . . , A n) and Y ⊆

T ′(A′

> 1

, . . . , A ′

> m

), and |X| = |Y | ≥ 1.2

Tuples may have null ( ⊥) values. Since we assume that no additional information is available regarding the relations, such as details about their creation, schema, or possible constraints, we do not differentiate among the various interpretations of 

⊥ [19]. Unlike SQL, we adopt a simple two-valued logic for comparisons with null. That is, comparisons involving ⊥ are treated as if ⊥ were a specific value, hence ( ⊥ == ⊥ is true and ⊥ == anything else is false). Furthermore, given two tables 

T (A1, . . . , A n) and T ′(A′

> 1

, . . . , A ′

> m

) and their corresponding alignment A(T, T ′) we introduce a new ordered operator denoted as ⋓(T, T ′, A) which is an asymmetric multiset     

> 1Code and datasets are available at https://github .com/Besatkassaie/NTS/ tree/master
> 2When unambiguous, A(T, T ′)is abbreviated as A.

ID Artwork Artist Date Created Medium Style 

t1 The Mona Lisa Leonardo da Vinci 1503–1506 Oil on poplar panel High Renaissance 

t2 The Hay Wain John Constable 1821 Oil on canvas Romanticism 

t3 The Burial at Ornans Gustave Courbet 1849–1850 Oil on canvas Early Netherlandish  

> (a) Query table Q. Tuples are sampled from Art-History YZMEPGTH.csv

ID Artwork Artist Date Created Medium Style Condition 

t1 Water Lilies Claude Monet 1897–1926 Oil on canvas Nature Good 

t2 The Swing Jean-Honor´ e Fragonard 1767 Oil on canvas Figurative Excellent 

t3 The Fighting Temeraire J.M.W. Turner 1839 Oil on canvas Historical Good  

> (b) Unionable table T1. Tuples are sampled from Art-History UPFR2P3Y.csv

ID Artwork Artist Subject Matter Cultural Context 

t1 Mona Lisa Leonardo da Vinci Portrait of Lisa Gherardini General ... on later portraiture 

t2 The Persistence of Memory Salvador Dal´ ı Melting clocks Permanent collection ... New York 

t3 The Persistence of Memory Salvador Dal´ ı Melting clocks Museum of Modern Art, New York  

> (c) Unionable table T2. Tuples are sampled from Art-History CW81XE6V.csv

ID Artwork Artist Date Created Medium Style 

t1 The Mona Lisa Leonardo da Vinci 1503–1506 Oil on poplar panel High Renaissance 

t2 The Hay Wain John Constable 1821 Oil on canvas Romanticism 

t3 The Burial at Ornans Gustave Courbet 1849–1850 Oil on canvas Early Netherlandish 

t4 Mona Lisa Leonardo da Vinci ⊥ ⊥ ⊥

t5 The Persistence of Memory Salvador Dal´ ı ⊥ ⊥ ⊥

t6 The Persistence of Memory Salvador Dal´ ı ⊥ ⊥ ⊥       

> (d) The result of left-outer-union between Qand T2, i.e., T′=⋓(Q, T 2).

ID Artwork Artist Date Created Medium Style Condition 

t1 Water Lilies Claude Monet 1897–1926 Oil on canvas Nature Good 

t2 The Swing Jean-Honor´ e Fragonard 1767 Oil on canvas Figurative Excellent 

t3 The Fighting Temeraire J.M.W. Turner 1839 Oil on canvas Historical Good 

t4 The Burial at Ornans Gustave Courbet 1849–1850 Oil on canvas Early Netherlandish ⊥        

> (e) Diluted unionable table τ(T1, Q, ∆) where ∆ = 0 .2. Tuple from Qis italicized .

Fig. 2: Motivating example. Each tuple has been augmented by a unique identifier ID to distinguish it from others. 

extension to the classic outer union introduced by Codd [20]. 3

This operation, which we call left-outer-union, computes the union of tuples from two relations, T and T ′, that are only partially aligned, retaining all attributes of T even if they have no aligned attribute in T ′. Unaligned attributes from T ′ are removed. Let X be the aligned set of attributes from T and 

A(X) the aligned attributes from T ′. Let X′ be the remaining (unaligned) attributes of T. We project T ′ on the aligned attributes A(X) and add to T ′ additional attributes containing 

⊥, call this new relation T ′′ . Then T ⋓T ′ is the multiset union of T and T ′′ . Unlike SQL, even if all attributes align, we use multiset semantics and do not eliminate duplicates. 

Example 2.1: Consider the tables Q and T2 from Figure 2. Assuming attribute alignment is based on matching attribute names, the result of ⋓(Q, T 2) is illustrated in Figure 2d. Notice all attributes from Q are retained and notice this operator uses multiset semantics. For attributes of Q that are not present in T2, e.g., Style , the corresponding entries for tuples originating from T2 are padded with ⊥.          

> 3Amight be omitted for brevity; T⋓T′,⋓(T, T ′,A), and ⋓(T, T ′)denote the same operation.

III. N OVEL TABLE SEARCH 

A. NTS Problem Definition 

Given a query table Q, the unionability search problem involves identifying the k most unionable tables from a data lake [1], [11]. We adopt the definition of the unionability search problem from Fan et al. [11]. That is, for two tables 

T and T ′, a unionability scoring function U (T, T ′) maps the input tables to a score in the range [0 , 1] . Note the unionability scoring function assumes an alignment has been computed between T and T ′.

Definition 2: (Table Union Search) Given a collection of data lake tables T , a query table Q, and a unionability scoring function U over pairs of tables, table union search determines a subset S ⊆ T where |S| = k and ∀T ∈ S and T ′ ∈ T − S,we have U (Q, T ′) ≤ U (Q, T ).In contrast, Novel Table Search ( NTS ) aims to identify the 

l most novel and unionable tables from a data lake. In this work, we define NTS as the second step (Step 2 in Figure 1) that operates on the output of a unionable-table search system. Specifically, we assume that, given a query table Q, a table union search step has already identified a set S of unionable tables, where |S| = k. The second step then identifies an 

R ⊆ S based on novelty with respect to Q where |R| = l ≤ k.To do this, we assume a novelty scoring function that takes as input a query table Q and a set of tables R and outputs a score indicating the novelty of R with respect to Q.

Definition 3: (Novel Table Search) Given a query table Q,a set of unionable tables S where |S| = k, and a novelty scoring function gscore , Novel Table Search ( NTS ) finds a subset R ⊆ S where |R| = l and ∀S′ ⊆ S where |S′| = l and 

R̸ = S′, we have gscore( Q, S ′) ≤ gscore( Q, R ).

B. Properties of Novelty Scoring Functions 

Given a query table Q, we wish to identify l unionable tables (from a set S of unionable tables) that exhibit maximum novelty with Q. We identified two properties that a novelty scoring function should satisfy. 

Axiom 1: (Blatant Duplicate Axiom) 

S′ = S ∪ { Q} ∧ Q / ∈ S ⇒ gscore( S′) < gscore( S)

This axiom states that if the query table is included in the result set, the novelty score of the search result must be lower in comparison to a set without Q.Given a query table Q and a unionable table T , any tuple in 

T that already exists in Q should not contribute to the overall novelty of the search result, independent of the other tuples present in T . To formally define this, we first define a diluted version of T .

Definition 4: Given a query Q ∈ Q(B1, . . . , B z ), a union-able table T ∈ T (A1, . . . , A n), their corresponding alignment 

A, and degree of dilution 0 < ∆ ≤ 1, a diluted version of 

T with respect to Q is denoted as τ (T, Q, ∆) and contains T

outer-unioned with ⌈∆ · | Q|⌉ tuples from Q.

τ (T, Q, ∆) = ⋓(T, Q ′, A)

where Q′ ⊆ Q, |Q′| = ⌈∆ · | Q|⌉ .

Example 3.1: Assume that Table T1 in Figure 2b contains only the tuples shown, a possible dilution of T1 with respect to 

Q, denoted τ (T1, Q, ∆) for ∆ = 0 .2, is shown in Figure 2e. Axiom 2: (Dilution Axiom) 

S′= S ∪ { τ (Tm, Q, ∆) } ∧ Tm ∈ S ⇒ gscore( S′) <gscore( S)

Notice that both axioms are syntactic in that they state that the novelty score should penalize the inclusion of exact copies of tuples. They do not say anything about semantically similar tuples. Next, we introduce a concrete syntactic scoring function, nscore , as a specific instance of gscore , and prove that it satisfies these axioms. 

C. Novelty Score 

To build a novelty score over a table, we use a tuple novelty score. Given a pair of tuples t = ⟨v1, · · · vn⟩ and 

t′ = ⟨v′

> 1

, · · · , v ′

> n

⟩ we expect the tuple novelty score to satisfy the following conditions: C1) The tuple novelty score is minimum when two tuples are identical; C2) The tuple novelty score is maximum when both tuples have all non-null values and no corresponding attribute values are the same. With this intuition, we define a tuple novelty score. 

Definition 5: (Tuple Pair Novelty Score) Given two tuples with the same arity n, t = ⟨v1, · · · vn⟩, and t′ = ⟨v′

> 1

, · · · , v ′

> n

⟩,their tuple pair novelty score is defined as: 

tuple nscore( t, t ′) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

novelty (vi, v ′

> i

) (1) s.t. 

novelty (vi, v ′

> i

) = 



1 vi̸ = v′ 

> i

∧ vi, v ′

> i

̸ = ⊥,βi vi̸ = v′ 

> i

∧ (vi = ⊥ ∨ v′ 

> i

= ⊥),

0 else. 

where 0 ≤ βi ≤ 1. Note that 0 ≤ tuple nscore( t, t ′) ≤ 1.We assign a novelty of 1 to every pair of distinct constants. When one attribute value is null, we assign a different reward 

βi with the intuition that a null value could be equal to the given constant. The likelihood that this would happen depends on the number of repetitions in the domain of attribute i. Let 

Pi be the probability that two random tuples share the same (non-null) value on attribute i, then we set βi = 1 −Pi. Finally, when both values are null, there is no novelty. 

Definition 6: (Tuple Novelty) We define the novelty of a tu-ple t in table T (Tuple Novelty ) as the minimum tuple nscore :

N (t) = min {tuple nscore( t, t ′) : t′ ∈ T ∧ t̸ = t′}

Example 3.2: For the table in Figure 2e, the tuple novelty of t3 is the minimum of the tuple pair novelty of 

{(t3, t 1), (t3, t 2), (t3, t 4)}. The attribute Condition con-tains one null value and two equal values, so its corresponding 

β is computed from the data as 1−13 = 23 . For Medium , there is a single value so PM edium = 1 , hence its β is 0 meaning nulls in this attribute would not contributing to novelty. All other attributes in this example have only unique values meaning 

β = 1 . However, since the only null value is on Condition ,we only need βCondition for this simple example. Hence, 

N (t3) = min { 46 , 56 , 4 + 1 × 23

6 } = 46

The intuition is that t3 provides the least novelty when compared to t1 (since they have the most overlap), the most when compared to t2. And the parameter β models that the novelty of the null is between that of an identical value ( t1)and a distinct value ( t2). Definition 7: (Table Novelty Score) Given a table T with 

y tuples |T | = y the novelty score of T is defined as: 

table nscore( T ) = 1

y

X

> t∈T

N (t) (2) Therefore, the novelty score of a table is defined as the sum of novelty of all tuples of the table divided by the total number of tuples. We carefully account for both the number of tuples and the degree of novelty each introduces. For a high novelty, we expect each tuple to contribute meaningful added value in terms of novelty, i.e., N (t) > 0. In a data-market setting where each table (and therefore tuple) has an acquisition cost, the novelty score measures novelty per unit cost, penalizing tables with many redundant tuples (those with N (t) = 0 ). To compute the novelty score of a query table Q with respect to l unionable tables, we take the left outer-union of the query table with the l unionable tables and compute the table novelty of the result. Definition 8: (Search Novelty Score) Given a query table 

Q and a set of l unionable tables R = {T1, · · · Tl}, and a set of alignments from Q to each of the Ti denoted as A = {A 1, · · · , Al}; the novelty score of the search, 

nscore( Q, R, A), is defined: 

nscore( Q, R, A) = table nscore( ˘T )

where ˘T is: ˘T = Q ∪ [

> Ti∈R

⋓(Q∅, T i, Ai) (3) where Q∅ = Q \ Q represents an empty table that retains the same schema as Q. □

By incorporating Q into the computation of the search novelty score ( nscore ), we reflect the novelty over the query table, in the overall novelty score of the results. Next, we show that the search novelty score function satisfies the axioms introduced earlier. 

Theorem 1: The Search Novelty Score (Definition 8) satisfies the blatant duplicate axiom and the dilution axiom. □

We define the Novel Table Search (NTS ) problem as selecting l tables from the k unionable tables such that the search novelty score of the search result is maximized. 

Definition 9: (Novel Table Search) Given a query table Q,a set of k unionable tables S = {T1, · · · Tk}, and a set of alignments from Q to S denoted as A = {A 1, · · · , Ak}, NTS 

finds a set of l tables R where: 

R = argmax 

> S′⊆S, |S′|=l

nscore( Q, S ′, A) (4) To find the exact solution for NTS , we must evaluate all subsets of size l from S. For each subset, we compute its novelty score, leading to an exponential number of evaluations. As a result, finding the exact solution is computationally infeasible, especially for large k and l.

Theorem 2: Finding an optimal solution to the Novel Table Search problem is NP-Hard. □

To address this complexity, we propose an approximate algorithm in the next section. IV. A TTRIBUTE -B ASED NOVEL TABLE SEARCH 

To approximate the nscore , we use an attribute-based ap-proach that estimates the novelty of attributes rather that iterating over tuples individually. Our solution ( ANTs ) es-timates the syntactic dissimilarity (novelty) scores between aligned attributes. ANTs returns an ordered list of tables, and hence can be used to rank (or rerank) a list of tables produced by a table union search system. In this computation, we maximize syntactic dissimilarity of attributes while still prioritizing unionable (semantically similar) attributes. The building blocks of our approach are two functions that, for each pair of aligned attributes, compute their syntactic and semantic similarities. Two attributes are semantically similar if their domains contain the same or closely related concepts. Since we want to prioritize more unionable attributes, we follow the unionability literature and represent each attribute by an embedding in a semantic vector space and use the distance between their embeddings as a measure of semantic similarity. 

A. Syntactic Similarity of Attributes 

Abstractly, we need a function syn sim( Bi, A j ) ∈ [0 , 1] 

that represents the syntactic similarity of two attributes 

⟨Bi, A j ⟩. Two attributes are syntactically similar if their do-mains contain many identical values. We characterize each attribute by its observed value domain and use the overlap or distribution of these values as our measure of syntactic similarity. Note that it is common to use set-similarity mea-sures (such as Jaccard) to measure syntactic similarity. This works well for large domains. However, for small domains, simple set overlap may not be enough. Consider, for example, two attributes containing days of the week (at most seven values). One may represent online sales and have a distribution over all seven days. Another, representing band-tour dates may contain all seven days but be strongly biased to include mostly weekends. The Jaccard between these attributes is one, but the distributions are quite different. So for small domains, we instead exploit the distribution of values and use discrepancies between them as a signal of syntactic novelty. We define a hyperparameter called s, to distinguish whether an attribute belongs to a small or large domain. This value is determined empirically based on the characteristics of a data lake, as it influences the effectiveness of the ranking algorithm. Section VII-E discusses our study of this parameter. 

Syntactic Similarity for Large Domains Let V(Bi) and 

V(Aj ), be the domains of attributes Bi and Aj , respectively. If the size of the union of the domains is larger than s, we use the Jaccard similarity [21] to compute the attribute syntactic similarity. 

Syntactic Similarity for Small Domain For small-domain attributes, we compute the distribution of observed (non-⊥)values for each attribute and use the distance between these distributions as an indication of novelty. We denote the discrete probability distribution associated with attributes Bi and Aj by 

Bi and Aj , respectively. These distributions are computed over the union of the domains, and so each of them may have some missing values. We assign probability 0 for missing values. We then require a measure of difference, or a divergence metric, between two probability distributions that satisfies the following properties: i) The metric has a bounded range; ii) It remains defined in the presence of missing values; iii) It is symmetric, as no reference distribution exists and both attributes ( Bi and Aj ) are treated equally. The Jensen-Shannon 

divergence measure (JSD) has these desirable properties which align with our problem [22]–[24]. 4

Example 4.1: Assume that the tables in Figure 2(a–b) contain only the tuples shown. Consider the query table Q

in Figure 2 and the unionable tables T1 (Figure 2b) and T2

(Figure 2c), where in both cases attribute Artist is aligned with Q. Artist . Intuitively, the JSD between Q. Artist and 

T1.Artist (JSD = 1 ) is larger than between Q. Artist 

and T2.Artist (JSD = 0 .82 ) because in the former pair, 

> 4See Appendix B for additional details on the Jensen–Shannon divergence.

the empirical distributions place all their probability mass on 

different artists, whereas in the latter pair both distributions assign the same mass to Leonardo da Vinci . This shared mass makes the distributions closer and yields a smaller JSD. 

We define syn sim( Bi, A j ) for small domains using one minus the Jensen Shannon Divergence of their distributions. 

Definition 10: (Attribute Syntactic Similarity) For a pair of aligned attributes ⟨Bi, A j ⟩ ∈ A(Q, T ), let V(Bi) and 

V(Aj ) be their domains and D = |V (Bi) ∪ V (Aj )|. Fur-thermore, let Bi and Aj denote their discrete probability distribution over V(Bi) ∪ V (Aj ).

syn sim( Bi, A j ) = 

( |V (Bi)∩V (Aj )||V (Bi)∪V (Aj )| D > s 

1 − JSD( Bi, Aj ) D ≤ s (5) 

B. Semantic Similarity of Attributes 

To model the semantic similarity between pair of aligned attributes, we compute cosine similarity on their semantic rep-resentation as proposed in Fan et al. [11], which has achieved state-of-the-art performance in unionable table discovery. For an attribute A, let Sem( A) be the Starmie learned attribute embedding. 

Definition 11: (Attribute Semantic Similarity) For a pair of aligned attributes ⟨Bi, A j ⟩ ∈ A (Q, T ), Bi ∈ Q, Aj ∈ T ,the semantic similarity is defined as: 

sem sim( Bi, A j ) = cosSim(Sem( Bi), Sem( Aj )) (6) 

C. Novelty-Aware Unionability 

We now define the attribute novelty as a score that when maximized, the syntactic similarity is minimized and the semantic similarity is maximized. 

Definition 12: (Attribute Novelty) For a pair of aligned attributes ⟨Bi, A j ⟩ ∈ A (Q, T ), Bi ∈ Q, Aj ∈ T , the attribute novelty , AttNovelty( Bi, A j ), is defined as: 

(1 −syn sim( Bi, A j )) b ×sem sim( Bi, A j ) (7) where b ≥ 0 is a hyperparameter. □

Attribute novelty is designed to capture both the unionability and novelty of attribute pairs. The score is maximized for pairs with high unionability and high novelty, and minimized when both are low. The hyperparameter b allows us to adjust the relative importance of the two signals. When b = 1 , we are giving equal weight to the syntactic and semantic signals. Lower b gives more weight to semantic similarity, while larger 

b gives more weight to syntactic dissimilarity (novelty). The novelty of a table is then the sum of the attribute novelty over attributes aligned with a query table. 

Definition 13: (Table Novelty) Given a query table Q and a unionable table T , the table novelty function is defined as an aggregation over the attribute novelty of their aligned attributes: 

TableNovelty( Q, T ) = X  

> ⟨Bi,A j⟩∈A (Q,T )

AttNovelty( Bi, A j ) (8) Intuitively, we prefer highly unionable tables that are seman-tically similar to the query table that also contain syntactically different (novel) values. Therefore, we penalize the semantic similarity between aligned attributes based on their syntactic similarity. 

Example 4.2: Let us continue Example 4.1 with b = 1 and 

s = 5 , and assume that all aligned attributes have semantic similarity 1. T1 has an aligned counterpart for every attribute of Q. Except for Medium , these aligned pairs have large and disjoint domains, so their AttNovelty is maximal 1. For 

Medium , the two distributions overlap on Oil on canvas ,yielding JSD of 0.44 . Hence 

TableNovelty( Q, T 1) = 1+1+1+0 .44+1 = 4 .44 

By contrast, T2 has only two attributes aligned with Q.

T2.Artwork is syntactically novel and semantically similar to Q. Artwork and its AttNovelty is maximal 1. T2.Artist 

shares probability mass with Q. Artist , giving a JSD of 0.82 

and thus lower syntactic novelty: 

TableNovelty( Q, T 2) = 1+0 .82 = 1 .82 

D. The ANTs Solution 

In summary, ANTs takes as input a query table Q, a set 

S of k unionable tables, attribute alignments between Q and each table T ∈ S, and the number of tables to return, l. It exhaustively scans all unionable tables T ∈ S, computes their novelty scores using TableNovelty( Q, T ), sorts the candidates in descending order of novelty, and returns the top-l most novel unionable tables (Algorithm 1). 

Algorithm 1: ANTs 

Input: Q: query table; S: set of k unionable tables; A:attribute alignments; l: number of tables to return 

Output: R: list of l most novel unionable tables  

> 1

scores ← {} * table to score map  

> 2

foreach T ∈ S do  

> 3

A ← A[T ] * get alignment  

> 4

scores [T ] ← getTableNovelty (Q, T, A) * Def. 13  

> 5

scores ← sortByVal (scores )* descending sort  

> 6

R ← top(scores, l) * rank by novelty  

> 7

return R

V. B ASELINES AND COMPARED TECHNIQUES 

In our evaluation, we consider five techniques: one baseline, three alternative NTS variants, and a max–min diversification heuristic that serves as an approximate nscore baseline. Below, we summarize the key characteristics of each technique. 

Starmie : Starmie [11] is a state-of-the-art integrated frame-work designed for dataset discovery in data lakes, that can be used for table union search. It employs a contrastive learning approach to train attribute encoders entirely in an unsuper-vised fashion. These attribute encoders capture the contextual semantics within tables. Starmie computes a unionability score for attributes by measuring the cosine similarity between their embedding vectors, and aggregates these to derive an overall unionability score for tables based on their aligned attributes. Starmie employs its own built-in alignment mechanism, which is based on maximum bipartite graph matching. We use 

Starmie as a baseline for ranking the top k unionable tables based on their unionability scores relative to a given query. The details of the hyperparameter settings used for Starmie 

are provided in Section VII. 

Greedy with Marginal Contribution ( GMC ): While our work is the first to incorporate diversity (novelty) into table search, diversity in query results has been studied in prior re-search [17]. Viera et al. [17] compare a number of approaches for query result diversification of which they show that an approach called GMC achieves the best trade-off between result quality (precision and optimality) and execution time. We are interested in investigating how this method would perform if adapted to solve NTS . Given a query (which may be a document, an image, or in our case a table), Vieira et al. [17] aim to retrieve a set of l elements that are highly similar to the query while ensuring that the selected set is mutually diverse, thereby forming a k-similar diversification set . Let S′ ⊆ S,where S is the set of candidate results. Let δsim (q, S ′) denote the similarity between the query q and the elements in S′, and let δdiv (S′) measure the diversity among the elements in S′.Given a parameter λ ∈ [0 , 1] , Vieira et al. [17] formulate the objective as a Max-Sum optimization problem to identify R:

R = arg max  

> S′⊆S,l =|S′|

F(q, S ′) (9) s.t. 

F(q, S ′) = ( l−1) ×(1 −λ)×δsim (q, S ′)+2 ×λ×δdiv (S′)

Since finding the optimal set R is NP-hard, Vieira et al. [17] proposed GMC , a deterministic approximation algorithm for identifying R. GMC was evaluated against all known methods for diversifying query results that rely solely on relevance and diversity scores, and was shown to consistently outperform others in achieving higher values of the objective function 

F(q, S ′). For this reason, we compare our approach only against GMC . Next, we describe how we have adapted GMC 

for our setting. Given a query table Q and a set of unionable tables S, we employ the GMC algorithm to select the l most unionable and novel tables. To do so, we supply GMC with two functions: 1) 

a function to measure the similarity (i.e., unionability) between the query table Q and a data lake table T ∈ S denoted as δsim (Q, T ) : Q × S → R+ for which we use sem sim 

(Definition 11); 2) a function to quantify the syntactic novelty between two data lake tables T, T ′ ∈ S which is denoted as 

δdiv (T, T ′) : S ×S → R+ and for which we use 1−syn sim 

(Definition 10). Following the recommendation of Vieira et al. [17], we set λ = 0 .7 in all experiments. 

GMM : We also used an approximation called GMM , a greedy algorithm with a theoretical approximation guarantee for Max-Min diversification . The Max-Min Diversification problem selects a subset of items such that the minimum pairwise distance among them is maximized [25]. Formally, given a universe U of k elements and a subset size l, the goal is to find a subset S of size l that maximizes div (S):

S = arg max 

> S′⊆U |S′|=l

div (S′)

where div (S)= min  

> s,s ′∈S,s ̸=s′

δ(s, s ′) measures the smallest pair-wise distance among elements of S. Ravi et al. [25] prove that Max-Min Diversification objective can be achieved by GMM 

with 12 -approximation guarantees, i.e., the div (S) achieved is provably at least 50% of the optimal (best possible) value. Therefore, GMM provides an approximate nscore baseline focused only on syntactic novelty (diversity). We use the variant of GMM proposed by Moumoulidou et al. [26], which allows initialization with a given element. We use our previ-ously defined syntactic distance function, δdiv , to measure the pairwise syntactic distance between tables (see Section IV). 

Semantic Representation for Syntactic Novelty ( SemNov ): 

Next, as an additional baseline, we investigate whether using the distance between table embeddings as a semantic novelty signal can result in syntactic novelty, and we compare its effectiveness to that of ANTs . Table embeddings such as TABBIE [27] capture the underlying semantics of tables and the distance between them serves as a proxy for semantic differences, and consequently for semantic novelty between tables. We propose to penalize the semantic similarity between two attributes by the semantic similarity between their corre-sponding table embeddings. Note that in this case we do not distinguish between different domain sizes. Therefore, for an arbitrary pair of aligned attributes ⟨Bi, A j ⟩ ∈ A(Q, T ) where 

Bi ∈ Q, Aj ∈ T , AttrSemNovelty( Bi, A j ) will be: 

AttrSemNovelty( Bi, A j ) = (1 − table sim( Q, T )) b

× sem sim( Bi, A j ) (10) where table sim( Q, T ) denotes the cosine similarity between the vectors representing tables Q and T extracted from the TABBIE trained model and takes values in [0 , 1] . Again table novelty here is just the sum of the semantic AttrSemNovelty 

scores. 

Entity Resolution (ER) for Novel Table Search: ANTs 

adopts an attribute-based strategy to reduce the time complex-ity of the novel table search problem. Alternatively, one could consider a tuple-based approximation approach. We apply an entity resolution technique to estimate the degree of overlap, that is, the number of matching entities, between a query table and candidate tables in the data lake, and then rank the tables such that those with less (approximate tuple) overlap receive a higher score. An entity resolution process comprises two main steps: blocking and matching. When a query table arrives, its tuples are first blocked with those of each unionable table, and matching is then performed only within the shared blocks. As our work is based on syntactic novelty, we adopt a syntactic matching approach for the entity resolution task [28]. For blocking, we experimented with several techniques from the literature such as ScaNN [29], kNN − Join [30], and 

DeepBlocker [31] and adopted ScaNN which was the fastest method. A detailed explanation of our choice of these blocking techniques is provided in Appendix D. We refer to this system as ER in our experiments. VI. E VALUATION METRICS 

We will use the search novelty score ( nscore ) (Definition 8) to evaluate the quality of NTS solutions. However, nscore 

is computationally expensive to compute, so we will report it only for small benchmarks and employ several compu-tationally cheaper metrics. Recall that the search novelty score decreases when the query table is unioned with the result table (Equation (3)). Thus, intuitively a technique is less desirable if it ranks an exact copy of the query table (when such a copy exists in the data lake) among the top results. We capture this tendency using the Blatant-Duplicate 

metric, which measures, for each query, whether an exact copy of the query table appears in the top-l results. Similarly, including tuples of the query table in any unionable table among the top-l results (dilution) is detrimental to the search novelty score. Heuristically, we prefer methods that prioritize undiluted unionable tables and we quantify this behavior using the Syntactic Novelty Measure (SNM). 

A. Blatant Duplicates 

The term blatant duplicate in Axiom 1 refers to a unionable table that is a duplicate of the query table. Motivated by this axiom, we introduce a metric to evaluate whether a system ranks such blatant duplicates of query tables among the top-l results, when they exist within the data lake. Given a query Q

and a set of tables, R, returned by a novel table search method where |R| = l, we define the metric as follows. 

blatant-duplicate (Q, R ) = 

(

1, if Q ∈ R, 

0, else . (11) To use this metric in our experiments, we include the query itself in the set of k unionable tables considered for NTS .

B. Measuring Syntactic Novelty 

Building on the concept of binary preference (bpref) [32], an established evaluation metric in the Information Retrieval community, we propose two new metrics to assess a search algorithm’s effectiveness in identifying novel tables from a data lake. Binary preference is designed for evaluation set-tings with incomplete relevance assessments. The bpref metric penalizes a system when a judged non-relevant document is ranked above a judged relevant one, while being unaffected by the retrieval of unjudged documents. Similarly, for a query Q and a set of k unionable tables 

S = {T1, · · · , T k}, with their corresponding alignments A,and a dilution degree ∆ we construct a new set S = S ∪Sdil 

where Sdil = {τ (Ti)|Ti ∈ S}. We then evaluate how effectively a search algorithm ranks each unionable table Ti above its counterpart τ (Ti) when ranking the elements in S and select-ing top l tables using a measure we call Syntactic Novelty Measure (SNM). 

Definition 14: (Syntactic Novelty Measure (SNM)) Let 

S be a set of k unionable tables for a query Q, and Sdil =

{τ (Ti)|Ti ∈ S} a set of diluted tables with degree ∆. Suppose a novel search algorithm returns an ordered list S′ ⊂ S ∪ Sdil 

of size l.

SNM = 1 − |O|+|Y |

l (12) s.t. O = {Ti | (τ (Ti) ∈ S′ ∧ Ti /∈ S′)

∨ (Ti = Q ∧ τ (Ti) /∈ S′ ∧ Ti ∈ S′)},Y = {Ti | (I(S′, T i) > I(S′, τ (Ti))) 

∨ (Ti = Q ∧ I (S′, T i) < I(S′, τ (Ti))) }.

I(S′, T ) denotes the position of table T in the ordered list 

S′. A lower index indicates a better rank for the table. Intu-itively, O denotes the set of diluted tables that appear without their corresponding original counterparts in the top l results while Y represents the number of table pairs in the top l where the diluted version is ranked lower (i.e., considered superior) to its original counterpart. To avoid rewarding systems that return blatant duplicates, we impose a penalty for retrieving blatant duplicates in the formulation of O and Y . Note that 

0 ≤ SNM ≤ 1. The minimum SNM value of 0 occurs when, for a given query, only diluted versions of the unionable tables are returned. SNM applies to ranking-based NTS methods. As our GMC 

method returns a set rather than a ranked list, we also define a rank-oblivious variant. 

Definition 15: (Simplified SNM (SSNM)) The Simplified SNM is defined as: SSNM = 1 − |O|

l (13) 

C. Additional Metrics 

Given that GMC (Section V) is computationally expensive, we aim to investigate to what extent ANTs can optimize the objective defined for GMC . As an additional evaluation metric, we compare the systems based on their F(Q, S ′) or simply 

F (Equation (9)). VII. E XPERIMENTS 

We implemented ANTs , ER , GMM , and GMC using Python 3.8.5, while SemNov required Python 3.6 due to library dependencies. All experiments were conducted on a server with five AMD EPYC 9554 64-core processors and 512 GB RAM. We use the publicly available Starmie codebase. 5

A. Datasets 

We begin with a detailed description of the three datasets and outline their characteristics and how we adapt them for our experimental setup. We have two main considerations in preparing datasets: i) We tackle the novel table search problem as a step on top of a unionable-table search system (see Definition 3). To eliminate the influence of the initial search system’s performance, in each dataset and for each query table, we only consider k unionable tables (as identified in the ground truth). We then apply various approaches solely to these unionable tables to find top l final tables. We set k = 20 ;ii) A key component of our evaluation is to systematically include both diluted versions of data lake tables and the query table itself (as a blatant duplicate) in the pool of unionable candidates. In our dataset preparation, we set the degree of 

> 5https://github.com/megagonlabs/starmie

dilution (∆) to 0.4 across all datasets. Note that all tables in the data lake have a diluted version. Also note that we use the ground truth alignment for all experiments (except our ablation study of the influence of alignment quality in Section VII-E) and all the tables are non-empty. 

Table Union Search . The TUS dataset was synthesized from 10 base tables obtained from UK and Canadian open data [1]. A sequence of projection and selection operations were applied to these base tables to derive unionable tables. We use the same TUS version as that used by Khatiwada. et al. [2]. 6

In this dataset, queries share common unionable tables, that is, a single data lake table may be unionable with multiple distinct query tables. Since diluting the data lake tables is part of our dataset preparation, we use a subset of queries that do not share unionable data lake tables, to simplify the implementation process. The resulting TUS dataset contains 42 query tables and 1008 unionable data lake tables, including 504 diluted tables. 

Santos. Leveraging a benchmark creation technique similar to that proposed in Nargesian et al. [1], Santos Small was also constructed using open data [2]. Similar to TUS, we retain only a set of queries that do not share unionable tables with others. Our repurposed Santos Small dataset consists of 35 queries and 948 data lake tables, including 474 diluted versions. We refer to this dataset simply as Santos. 

Ugen-v2 . The most recent unionable table benchmark was generated by LLMs, Ugen-v2 [18]. This benchmark has been shown to be more challenging for all unionable table search solutions compared to hand-curated benchmarks like TUS and Santos. We created a smaller version of Ugen-v2, ap-proximately 40% of the Ugen-v2 queries with the smallest number of tuples and 19 queries with two considerations. First, to eliminate any potential negative influence from automatic alignment, we selected a subset of queries along with their corresponding unionable tables and manually aligned their attributes. Secondly, computing the search novelty score (Def-inition 8) for our medium-sized datasets proved to be time-consuming. To enable computation of the nscore, we created the smaller version of this challenging dataset. For brevity, we call our smaller version of this benchmark simply Ugen-v2. 

B. Experiment Setup 

We provide a detailed description of each system in our experimental comparison, including its configuration. 

Starmie : We use Starmie [11] for two purposes: (1) in offline mode, to generate contextualized attribute embeddings that are subsequently used by all methods; and (2) in online mode, as a baseline method for ranking unionable tables given a query ta-ble. We represent attributes using embeddings generated by the 

Starmie model, which are used to compute semantic similarity between attributes in ANTs , SemNov , and GMC . Starmie was fine-tuned on the Santos dataset [33], and the resulting model was subsequently used to generate attribute embeddings with 

> 6https://zenodo .org/records/14151800

vector size 768 for all datasets. 7 We configured the fine-tuning process with the following hyper-parameters: batch size = 64 ,

learning rate = 5 e − 5, max . seq . length = 128 , proj . dim . =768 , augment op = drop col , sample meth = tfidf entity ,

table order = column and num . of epochs = 3 . Refer to the official Starmie codebase for hyperparameter details. In the online mode, scalability is not a major concern when evaluating only the ground-truth unionable tables. Therefore, to rank the top-l unionable tables, we employ a straightforward linear scan approach with a similarity threshold of τ=0 .7 (see the Online Query Processing section in Fan et al. [11]). TABBIE: We use the pre-trained TABBIE model [27] in inference mode from its public codebase. 8 It represents each table with a 768 -dimensional embedding. Recall that TABBIE is used to create semantic embeddings for SemNov .

ER : Experiments use the ScaNN Python package (v1.4.2) with default settings and num neighbors = 5 , determined empirically for fast blocking. 9 For entity matching, we use the rule-based technique shared in the publicly available py-entitymatching (version 0.4.2) codebase. 10 We compare values of aligned attributes. Values are considered similar if their Levenshtein similarity is ≥ 0.85 .

C. Results for Effectiveness and Scalability 

ANTs returns a ranked list of novel unionable tables. To evaluate ranking quality, we require at least two results and vary l within [2 , 10] . Note that in the Ugen-v2 dataset, 79% (15/19) of queries have fewer than 12 unionable tables, with two of them being blatant duplicates of queries and their diluted versions and we account for this in the results. 

Blatant Duplicate Measure. Introducing novelty through penalization, as in ANTs and SemNov , yields better results (Table I) on the Santos dataset, while ANTs , SemNov , and 

ER perform best on TUS (Table I). On the Ugen-v2 dataset, 

ER , which relies on syntactic similarity for matching, achieves the lowest duplicate rate. TABLE I: The average percentage of queries per dataset yielding a blatant duplicate within the top l results ( l ∈ [2 , 10] ). Lower values indicate better performance. In all tables, Bold numbers show the best performance per row; the second best numbers underlined.                                

> Starmie GMC ER SemNov ANTs
> Santos 99.4% 81.9% 8.6% 0% 0%
> TUS 100% 99.5% 0% 0% 0%
> Ugen-v2 100% 98.8% 43.6% 52.6% 43.9%
> Ugen12 100% 100% 0% 0% 0%
> Ugen l= 2 100% 89.5% 0% 0% 0%

As previously noted, the Ugen-v2 dataset contains a limited number of unionable tables for 79% of the queries. To enable a more equitable comparison, we restrict the evaluation to queries with at least 12 unionable tables ( Ugen12 ). Under this 

> 7Starmie was fine-tuned on Santos arbitrarily, as it is expected to generalize across datasets without further tuning. Because all methods rely on the same fine-tuned model, the comparison is fair.
> 8https://github .com/SFIG611/tabbie
> 9https://pypi .org/project/scann/,
> 10 https://pypi .org/project/py-entitymatching/

condition, ANTs , SemNov , and ER have identical behavior. Since all queries have at least four unionable tables, we also report results for l = 2 (Ugen l = 2 ). Under this setting, 

ANTs , SemNov , and ER again show identical behavior and outperform the other methods. Considering these conditions and ER ’s performance on Santos, ANTs and SemNov remain the top performers overall. 

Syntactic Novelty Measure . The SNM metric evaluates a system’s ability to rank an original table above its diluted (less novel) versions and applies only to rank-based methods; hence, 

GMC is excluded. Figures 3b, 3d, and 3f report the average SNM across all queries for each dataset. As shown, ANTs 

consistently achieves superior performance across all datasets. Its best performance is observed on the TUS dataset, where it achieves the highest scores compared to the other datasets. The second best performing system is ER across all dataset. Furthermore, unlike the other two datasets, we observe a drop in SNM for ANTs and ER on the Ugen-v2 dataset at l = 3 . A closer examination reveals that the scarcity of unionable tables contributes to the observed behaviors.    

> (a) Santos (b) Santos
> (c) TUS (d) TUS
> (e) Ugen-v2 (f) Ugen-v2

Fig. 3: System performance across datasets for SSNM (left) and SNM (right), l ∈ [2 , 10] . Y-axis truncated. 

Simplified Syntactic Novelty Measure. Compared to SNM, SSNM provides less information, as it measures only the sys-tem’s ability to retrieve novel tables not their ranking. Figure 3 (left column (a), (c), (e)) shows the average SSNM across all queries for each dataset. ANTs again outperforms others on TUS and Santos. Given its stable performance, ER ranks as the TABLE II: Average novelty score across Ugen v2 queries.                     

> lStarmie GMC GMM ER SemNov ANTs
> nscore( T)20.0 0.004 0.3702 0.3704 0.3829 0.3900
> 30.0073 0.0065 0.1816 0.2383 0.2412 0.2474

second-best system. As l increases, all methods converge, an expected result given the limited number of unionable tables per query (at most 20). For the Ugen-v2 dataset, a notable drop in most system’s performance is observed, due to the scarcity of unionable tables. 

Search Novelty Score (nscore). Computing the search nov-elty on our medium-sized datasets (TUS and Santos) proved computationally intensive, even with parallelization using 20 CPUs. Therefore, we limited the computation of search novelty to l ∈ [2 , 3] and focused solely on the Ugen-v2 dataset. Table II demonstrates that ANTs outperforms all other methods, achieving the highest average novelty. We assessed statistical significance via paired t-tests for l = 2 and l = 3 .Improvements of ANTs over Starmie , GMC , and SemNov 

are statistically significant ( p ≤ 0.05 ). SemNov ranks sec-ond and statistically significantly outperforms Starmie and 

GMC . ANTs and SemNov achieve novelty scores compa-rable to GMM , with no statistically significant differences observed. This indicates that the penalization-based methods achieve novelty scores comparable to those of a provably 12 -approximate baseline. Another important observation is that ANTs is the best-performing system overall in terms of the novelty score (Table II). The next best methods are SemNov and ER , which compete for second place on the novelty score, followed by 

GMC , with Starmie performing worst. This ranking is consis-tent with their relative behavior on SNM, SSNM, and Blatant-Duplicate, indicating that our evaluation metrics effectively capture the intended objectives. 

Additional Metrics . Table III compares F values of ANTs 

against the baselines across all benchmarks. Due to space limitations, we report only the average percentage of queries for which ANTs achieves an equal or higher F value at 

l = 10 . The results for l ∈ [2 , 10] are provided in Table VII of Appendix. ANTs consistently underperforms GMC on the Santos and TUS datasets across all levels of l, as well as on the Ugen-v2 dataset for l ∈ [2 , 4] , highlighting GMC ’s effectiveness in achieving its optimization objective. However, 

ANTs consistently outperforms SemNov and ER across all datasets and levels of l, achieving higher performance on at least 54.3% of the queries. Given that GMC is computationally expensive, ANTs serves as a more efficient and effective alternative than others when runtime performance is a concern. TABLE III: Percentage of queries where ANTs achieves equal or higher F at l = 10 . Values ≥ 50 are italicized.                

> Starmie GMC ER SemNov
> Santos 48.6% 2.9% 54.3% 82.9% TUS 66.7 %2.4% 73.8% 66.7% Ugen-v2 73.7% 73.7% 84.2% 94.7%

Fig. 4: Exec. time across datasets, averaged over all queries ( l ∈ 

> [2 ,10] ). Y-axis truncated.

Scalability. We compare the runtime performance of various systems for the re-ranking task. The execution time for all systems is negligible ( ≈ 0) on Ugen-v2. Therefore, we report the average runtime over all queries for TUS and Santos in Figure 4. ANTs and SemNov have small execution time across these datasets, less than 2.4 seconds. In contrast, GMC 

and ER incur substantial overhead. This significant latency makes GMC and ER less suitable particularly for interactive data analysis scenarios over data lakes, where low-latency responses are essential for effective user interaction. 

D. Comparison with DUST 

In an upcoming paper, Khatiwada et al. [34] study arelated problem and propose the DUST system. Given a query table Q, DUST aims to identify l unionable tuples that are maximally dissimilar to both Q and to one another. Like our approach, their method builds on existing unionable search techniques, but unlike ours, it does not re-rank tables. Rather, it operates at the tuple level, returning a set of tuples drawn from multiple unionable tables that are the most diverse. In addition, Khatiwada et al. [34] focus on semantic dissimilarity, whereas our work aims to develop a table reranking solution that maximizes syntactic dissimilarity (while maintaining high unionability or semantic similarity). To adapt DUST for our problem, we evaluate the novelty of its results (a set of diverse tuples which we model as a single table) by computing the search novelty score of this table and comparing this to the search novelty score of the top-1 table returned by ANTs . To do this, we find the size of 

ANTs ’ top ranked table ( l), and run DUST to find the most diverse l tuples. We would expect DUST to out-perform ANTs 

since it is drawing tuples from many tables. Our experiments are run on Ugen-v2 and show that, although DUST achieves a slightly higher novelty score than ANTs , it does so only after retrieving many more tables and tuples and incurring substantially higher running time (Table IV). We report the average size of the top-1 ANTs table over all queries along with the total number of acquired tuples (and tables used in the search ( #Acq.tup ). #Acq.tup is just the size of the Top-1 for ANTs and is the sum of the tuples in k table TABLE IV: The novelty score, the number of acquired tuples and tables, the final number of novel tuples, and the execution time are shown. The best values are shown in bold .             

> nscore( T)#Acq.tup. #Nov.tup. #Acq.tbl. Exec.time(s)
> ANTs 0.4614 23 23 1≈0
> DUST 0.4966 416 23 5101

from which DUST is drawing its diverse tuples. Hence, in data-market settings with tuple-acquisition costs or in latency-sensitive scenarios, ANTs offers a better cost–benefit trade-off, whereas when novelty is the sole objective and resources are unconstrained, DUST is preferable. 

E. Ablation Studies: Constituent Techniques and Parameters 

We report the main findings from three ablation studies on key components of our approach. 

Alignment Quality: Using an automatic alignment algo-rithm [34] (instead of the ground truth alignment) is found to be detrimental in 92% of all (system X, dataset Y) settings for SSNM and in 89% of settings for SNM. However, even with poor quality alignments, ANTs continues to out-perform other NTS approaches in 48% and 89% of all possible ( l,dataset Y) settings for SSNM and SNM, respectively. 

Novelty of Search Result: Next, we study how the novelty of the initial search results affects the effectiveness of our novelty-aware reranker. Our experiments show that increasing the redundancy of the initial result is detrimental to ANTs ’s performance on all datasets in terms of SSNM, with a similar pattern observed for SNM. 

Hyperparameters: An analysis of the ablation results on the domain-size threshold s and penalization degree b indicates that our method is robust to the choice of these parameters on the datasets considered: SNM and SSNM exhibit only limited variation across the tested values. Thus, ANTs is not sensitive to the exact choice of s and b: its performance remains stable even when these parameters are not set to their empirically optimal values, s = 10 and b ∈ 4, 5 across all datasets. VIII. ANTs FOR DOWNSTREAM TASK 

We evaluate the impact of ANTs , on a downstream rating-prediction task using the freely available IMDb Extensive Dataset. 11 We compare three configurations for constructing the training data: (i) Baseline , no data discovery is applied and we use only the query table; (ii) Starmie , we augment the query table with the tables returned by Starmie ; and (iii) 

ANTs , we augment the query table with the tables returned by 

Starmie but reranked by ANTs . We build a regression model to predict the average user rating ( avg_vote ) from movie metadata. 12 The IMDb movie table is randomly split into training (80%) and test (20%) sets. From the training set, we randomly select 1% of the tuples and partition them into three distinct query tables, each retaining all predictive attributes (features). A synthetic data lake of unionable tables is created 

> 11 https://www .kaggle .com/datasets/simhyunsu/imdbextensivedataset
> 12 This task design is a modified version of a task used to show the efficacy of other data discovery approaches [11].

from the remaining training tuples following Nargesian et al. [1]. For each query, we additionally create a diluted variant of the unionable tables (with a dilution degree of 0.4) and manually insert the query table into the data lake. We use three standard regressors: Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM), Random Forest (RF), and XGBoost (XGB), and evaluate them using standard regression metrics (R 2 and RMSE). 13 Training regressors on random selections of k unionable tables, we observe that LGBM consistently outperforms the others across all k ∈ [2 , 10] for both R 2 and RMSE; we therefore adopt LGBM as the model for comparing table discovery strategies. On the diluted dataset, where redundancy in the training dataset is guaranteed, ANTs consistently outperforms both 

Starmie and Baseline for all values of k and for both R 2 and RMSE. A paired t-test ( p ≤ 0.05 ) shows that improvements over Baseline are significant; all improvements over Starmie 

are statistically significant except for k=5 . On the non-diluted dataset, for both R 2 and RMSE, ANTs significantly outperforms Baseline , but no significant difference is observed between ANTs and Starmie . Overall, we conclude that in the presence of redundancy, reranking the Starmie results by ANTs is consistently beneficial for downstream machine learning tasks. In the non-diluted setting, the reranking step is not detrimental; thus, the novelty-aware reranker can be safely applied always even when the redundancy level of the dataset is unknown. IX. R ELATED WORK 

Table Discovery . Given a query table and an expansion strategy, discovering useful tables from data lakes has been extensively studied in recent years [12], [35], with joinable and unionable expansions receiving the most attention. Var-ious aspects of the problem have been addressed, including scalability and accuracy. Focusing on unionable table search, Nargesian et al. [1] define two tables as unionable if they share unionable attributes. To assess attribute unionability, they use attribute values, their mappings to an ontology, along with semantic embeddings of values. D3L extends the notion of attribute unionability [16]. Khatiwada et al. [2] further improved unionable table search by modeling relationships between attributes. Recognizing that attribute understanding is critical for discovering unionable tables, recent research has increasingly focused on enhancing attribute representations. Hu et al. [36] and Fan et al. [11] incorporate contextualized information to develop richer and more effective representa-tions of attributes. 

Novel Data Discovery . A rich body of literature explores methods for retrieving novel results across various types of systems, categorized by the forms of user queries they support, including direct user queries (ad hoc information retrieval IR) [13], [37], indirect user queries (recommender systems), queries expressed as quasi-SQL statements [38], or queries represented as tables [34]. Some systems also allow users 

> 13 We implemented and evaluated all models using scikit-learn’s APIs https: //scikit-learn .org.

to express preferences regarding the trade-off between result quality and retrieval speed [38], [39]. For a comprehensive overview of related work on novel search in IR and recom-mender systems, we refer the reader to Wu et al. [37]. 

Tuple Similarity. Our approach is grounded in syntactic simi-larity between tuples from the query table and candidate union-able tables. Prior work has proposed various techniques for comparing tuples in other contexts. In the absence of schema information and other metadata, a framework is developed for computing similarity between database instances even when they contain missing data (i.e., null values) [19]. Glavic et al. [19] developed a similarity measure based on matching between tuples of database instances. They distinguish be-tween different types of null values, which they leverage in developing their measure. In contrast, our approach assumes that all null values are treated uniformly. X. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

We addressed the problem of identifying novel unionable tables from data lakes. To this end, we proposed two general properties that any scoring mechanism should satisfy when ranking tables based on their novelty. We propose and compare several novel table search ( NTS ) methods. The first, ANTs ,ranks tables with respect to relevance (semantic similarity) and diversity (syntactic dissimilarity), that is the retrieved tables are as relevant as possible to the query, and, at the same time, the result set is as diverse as possible. ANTs is a new, scal-able, approximate algorithm and we compare this to GMC , a known slower approximate algorithm for query diversification using the same relevance and diversity functions as ANTs .

SemNov , uses semantic dissimilarity (specifically the distance between table embeddings) instead of syntactic dissimilarity. The fourth, ER, uses an entity-based dissimilarity, where the inverse of entity overlap (after applying entity-resolution) is used as table diversity. Our experiments show that ANTs 

outperforms the other NTS methods. We also demonstrate its positive impact on a downstream data-intensive task and conduct several ablation studies of its components. Several aspects of this work remain open for future exploration. 

Query Table Quality. If a query table contains poor quality data, a search algorithm may lack sufficient information to identify truly novel tables. Drawing inspiration from IR query reformulation techniques [40], one approach to enhance the quality of a query table is to enrich the query using hypothet-ical tuples or attributes generated by an oracle (e.g., LLMs). We plan to investigate the impact of query expansion in NTS .

Novelty-Aware Table Embeddings. In this work, we computed relevance using the similarity of attribute embeddings. This was used as a proxy for table unionability. As a direction for future work, we aim to incorporate diversity (or novelty) di-rectly into the model’s objective function for creating attribute embeddings, allowing us to address NTS through a unified and end-to-end process. 

Benchmark. The benchmarks used in our experiments were not originally designed for the NTS problem, and as a result, they may not fully capture the capabilities of our framework. As part of future work, we plan to develop new open benchmarks tailored specifically to the NTS task. XI. A CKNOWLEDGMENT 

We acknowledge the support of the Canada Excellence Research Chairs (CERC) program. Nous remercions le Chaires d’excellence en recherche du Canada (CERC) de son soutien. XII. AI-G ENERATED CONTENT ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

All ideas, methods, and results presented in this paper were conceived and developed entirely by the authors. The use of AI tools did not contribute to the formulation of any scientific ideas, methodologies, analyses, or conclusions. An AI-based writing assistant was used occasionally to suggest alternative wording and correct spelling or grammatical errors. REFERENCES [1] F. Nargesian, E. Zhu, K. Q. Pu, and R. J. Miller, “Table union search on open data,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 813–825, 2018. [2] A. Khatiwada, G. Fan, R. Shraga, Z. Chen, W. Gatterbauer, R. J. Miller, and M. Riedewald, “Santos: Relationship-based semantic table union search,” Proc. ACM Manag. Data , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2023. [3] A. S. R. Santos, A. Bessa, C. Musco, and J. Freire, “A sketch-based index for correlated dataset search,” in ICDE , 2022, pp. 2928–2941. [4] S. Castelo, R. Rampin, A. S. R. Santos, A. Bessa, F. Chirigati, and J. Freire, “Auctus: A dataset search engine for data discovery and augmentation,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2791–2794, 2021. [5] Y. Dong, K. Takeoka, C. Xiao, and M. Oyamada, “Efficient joinable table discovery in data lakes: A high-dimensional similarity-based approach,” in ICDE , 2021, pp. 456–467. [6] C. Koutras, G. Siachamis, A. Ionescu, K. Psarakis, J. Brons, M. Fragk-oulis, C. Lofi, A. Bonifati, and A. Katsifodimos, “Valentine: Evaluating matching techniques for dataset discovery,” in ICDE , 2021, pp. 468–479. [7] Y. Zhang and Z. G. Ives, “Finding related tables in data lakes for interactive data science,” in SIGMOD , 2020, pp. 1951–1966. [8] D. Brickley, M. Burgess, and N. F. Noy, “Google dataset search: Building a search engine for datasets in an open web ecosystem,” in 

WWW , 2019, pp. 1365–1375. [9] E. Zhu, D. Deng, F. Nargesian, and R. J. Miller, “JOSIE: overlap set similarity search for finding joinable tables in data lakes,” in SIGMOD ,2019, pp. 847–864. [10] R. J. Miller, F. Nargesian, E. Zhu, C. Christodoulakis, K. Q. Pu, and P. Andritsos, “Making open data transparent: Data discovery on open data,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 59–70, 2018. [11] G. Fan, J. Wang, Y. Li, D. Zhang, and R. J. Miller, “Semantics-aware dataset discovery from data lakes with contextualized column-based representation learning,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1726– 1739, 2023. [12] A. Chapman, E. Simperl, L. Koesten, G. Konstantinidis, L. Ib´ a˜ nez, E. Kacprzak, and P. Groth, “Dataset search: a survey,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 251–272, 2020. [13] C. L. A. Clarke, M. Kolla, G. V. Cormack, O. Vechtomova, A. Ashkan, S. B¨ uttcher, and I. MacKinnon, “Novelty and diversity in information retrieval evaluation,” in SIGIR , 2008, pp. 659–666. [14] S. Mehta, M. Dawande, G. Janakiraman, and V. S. Mookerjee, “How to sell a data set? pricing policies for data monetization,” Inf. Syst. Res. ,vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1281–1297, 2021. [15] J. Zhang, Y. Bi, M. Cheng, J. Liu, K. Ren, Q. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Cao, R. C. Fernandez, H. Xu, R. Jia, Y. Kwon, J. Pei, J. T. Wang, H. Xia, L. Xiong, X. Yu, and J. Zou, “A survey on data markets,” CoRR , vol. abs/2411.07267, 2024. [16] A. Bogatu, A. A. A. Fernandes, N. W. Paton, and N. Konstantinou, “Dataset discovery in data lakes,” in ICDE , 2020, pp. 709–720. [17] M. R. Vieira, H. L. Razente, M. C. N. Barioni, M. Hadjieleftheriou, D. Srivastava, C. T. Jr., and V. J. Tsotras, “On query result diversifica-tion,” in ICDE , 2011, pp. 1163–1174. [18] K. Pal, A. Khatiwada, R. Shraga, and R. J. Miller, “ALT-GEN: bench-marking table union search using large language models,” in Proc. VLDB Workshops , 2024. [19] B. Glavic, G. Mecca, R. J. Miller, P. Papotti, D. Santoro, and E. Veltri, “Similarity measures for incomplete database instances,” in EDBT , 2024, pp. 461–473. [20] E. F. Codd, “Extending the database relational model to capture more meaning,” ACM Trans. Database Syst. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 397–434, 1979. [21] M. Yu, G. Li, D. Deng, and J. Feng, “String similarity search and join: a survey,” Frontiers Comput. Sci. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 399–417, 2016. [22] J. Lin, “Divergence measures based on the shannon entropy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 145–151, 1991. [23] I. S. Dhillon, S. Mallela, and R. Kumar, “Enhanced word clustering for hierarchical text classification,” in SIGKDD , 2002, pp. 191–200. [24] J. Kieffer, “Elements of information theory (thomas m. cover and joy a. thomas),” SIAM Rev. , vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 509–511, 1994. [25] S. S. Ravi, D. J. Rosenkrantz, and G. K. Tayi, “Heuristic and special case algorithms for dispersion problems,” Oper. Res. , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 299–310, 1994. [26] Z. Moumoulidou, A. McGregor, and A. Meliou, “Diverse data selection under fairness constraints,” in ICDT , vol. 186, 2021, pp. 13:1–13:25. [27] H. Iida, D. Thai, V. Manjunatha, and M. Iyyer, “TABBIE: pretrained representations of tabular data,” in NAACL-HLT , 2021, pp. 3446–3456. [28] P. Konda, S. Das, P. S. G. C., A. Doan, A. Ardalan, J. R. Ballard, H. Li, F. Panahi, H. Zhang, J. F. Naughton, S. Prasad, G. Krishnan, R. Deep, and V. Raghavendra, “Magellan: Toward building entity matching management systems,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1197–1208, 2016. [29] R. Guo, P. Sun, E. Lindgren, Q. Geng, D. Simcha, F. Chern, and S. Kumar, “Accelerating large-scale inference with anisotropic vector quantization,” in ICML , vol. 119, 2020, pp. 3887–3896. [30] Y. N. Silva, W. G. Aref, P. Larson, S. Pearson, and M. H. Ali, “Similarity queries: their conceptual evaluation, transformations, and processing,” 

Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 395–420, 2013. [31] S. Thirumuruganathan, H. Li, N. Tang, M. Ouzzani, Y. Govind, D. Paulsen, G. Fung, and A. Doan, “Deep learning for blocking in entity matching: A design space exploration,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2459–2472, 2021. [32] T. Sakai, “Alternatives to bpref,” in SIGIR , 2007, pp. 71–78. [33] A. Khatiwada, R. Shraga, W. Gatterbauer, and R. J. Miller, “Integrating data lake tables,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 932–945, 2022. [34] A. Khatiwada, R. Shraga, and R. J. Miller, “Diverse unionable tuple search: Novelty-driven discovery in data lakes,” in EDBT , 2026, pp. 42–55. [35] G. Fan, J. Wang, Y. Li, and R. J. Miller, “Table discovery in data lakes: State-of-the-art and future directions,” in SIGMOD , 2023, pp. 69–75. [36] X. Hu, S. Wang, X. Qin, C. Lei, Z. Shen, C. Faloutsos, A. Katsifodimos, G. Karypis, L. Wen, and P. S. Yu, “Automatic table union search with tabular representation learning,” in ACL , 2023, pp. 3786–3800. [37] H. Wu, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, F. Lyu, B. He, B. Mitra, and X. Liu, “Result diversification in search and recommendation: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5354–5373, 2024. [38] H. Mirzaei and D. Rafiei, “Table union search with preferences,” in 

Proc. VLDB Workshops , 2023. [39] M. R. Vieira, H. L. Razente, M. C. N. Barioni, M. Hadjieleftheriou, D. Srivastava, C. T. Jr., and V. J. Tsotras, “Divdb: A system for diversifying query results,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1395–1398, 2011. [40] B. Kassaie, A. Kane, and F. W. Tompa, “Exploiting query reformulation and reciprocal rank fusion in math-aware search engines,” in DocEng ,2025, pp. 7:1–7:10. [41] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness , 1979. [42] Y. Li, J. Li, Y. Suhara, A. Doan, and W. Tan, “Effective entity matching with transformers,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1215–1235, 2023. [43] Y. Li, J. Li, Y. Suhara, A. Doan, and W. C. Tan, “Deep entity matching with pre-trained language models,” CoRR , vol. abs/2004.00584, 2020. [44] U. Brunner and K. Stockinger, “Entity matching with transformer architectures - A step forward in data integration,” in EDBT , 2020, pp. 463–473. [45] F. Neuhof, M. Fisichella, G. Papadakis, K. Nikoletos, N. Augsten, W. Nejdl, and M. Koubarakis, “Open benchmark for filtering techniques in entity resolution,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1671–1696, 2024. [46] M. F. Porter, “An algorithm for suffix stripping,” Program , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 130–137, 1980. [47] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis,” J. Comput. Appl. Math. , vol. 20, pp. 53– 65, 1987. [48] K. Wagstaff, C. Cardie, S. Rogers, and S. Schr¨ odl, “Constrained k-means clustering with background knowledge,” in ICML , 2001, pp. 577–584. [49] B. Babaki, “Cop-kmeans version 1.5,” 2017. 

APPENDIX 

A. Proofs 

In this section, we present two proofs supporting the theo-rems made in the main text. 

Theorem 1. The Search Novelty Score (Definition 8) satisfies the blatant duplicate axiom and the dilution axiom. Proof 1: Let T be the search result table constructed as described in Definition 8. For each tuple t ∈ T , we incorporate its tuple novelty computed according to Definition 6 into the overall novelty score of the result, as defined in Equation (2). By construction, all newly added tuples originate from the query table have already an identical counter part tuple in T ,consequently: i) For newly introduced tuples, all resulting N (t) evaluate to zero, since all tuple pairs involve an identical counter part tuple from the query table already in T : an increase in the denominator ( y), with the numerator remaining unchanged in Equation (2). ii) For existing tuples, in fact we add already-accounted-for tuples therefore this does not affect the minimum in (Definition 6) while it increases the number of tuples in (Definition 7) (i.e., a larger y). Consequently, the addition of query tuples leads to a lower nscore. Similarly, we can show that the nscore function (Definition 8) satisfies the Dilution axiom. 

Theorem 2. Finding on optimal R in Definition 9 is NP-Hard. Proof 2: If we represent the set S as a complete graph, the problem resembles the induced subgraph problem with a property Π and size l [41], where Π in our case requires that the subgraph of size l has the maximum nscore compared to all other subgraphs of the same size. Since verifying property 

Π is exponential, our problem is NP-Hard. 

B. Jensen-Shannon divergence 

We briefly review the Jensen-Shannon divergence [23]. Let the attributes Bj and Ai be discrete random variables that take on values from the set D with probability distribution Bi and 

Aj respectively. The relative entropy or Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between tow distributions Bi and Aj is computed as: 

KL( Bi, Aj ) = X

> v∈D

Bi(v) × log Bi(v)

Aj (v)

The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence has several issues that make it unsuitable for our use case. It is not a proper distance measure as it is asymmetric and does not satisfy the triangle inequality. Additionally, it is unbounded for missing values: if Bi(v) = 0 and Aj (v)̸ = 0 , KL (Bi, Aj ) = −∞ , making it impractical for our problem where probability mass can be missing in either of distributions. To address these limitations, we consider the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSd), which is derived from KL divergence but has desirable properties: it is symmetric, bounded within [0 , 1] , and can serves as a proper distance metric: 

JSd( Bi, Aj ) = 12 × (KL( Bi, M), KL( Aj , M)) where M = Bi+Aj 

> 2

is a mixture distribution of Bi and Aj .The Jensen-Shannon distance (JSD) between two probability distribution is the square root of JSd: 

JSD( Bi, Aj ) = 

q

JSd( Bi, Aj )

C. Ablation Study: Effects of Dataset Scarcity 

In this section, we study the effect of dataset scarcity on our results. 

1) Syntactic Novelty Measure: A closer examination re-veals that, in the Ugen-v2 small dataset, 80% of the queries for which ANTs performs poorly at l = 3 have only four unionable tables in the ground truth, two of which are blatant duplicates of the query table (including its diluted version). These low-quality matches negatively impact the SNM score. This scarcity of unionable tables contributes to the observed performance degradation. To test this hypothesis, we further restricted the Ugen-v2 small dataset to queries with at least 12 unionable tables, which resulted in trends consistent with the other datasets (Figure 9b). 

2) Simplified Syntactic Novelty Measure: Again, for the Ugen-v2 Small dataset, an unusual drop in the performance of ANTs is observed, is attributed to the limited number of unionable tables. To validate this hypothesis, we report SSNM scores for queries with at least 12 unionable tables. The results, shown in Figure 9a, support our assumption and confirm the impact of data sparsity on performance. 

D. Entity Resolution for Novel Table Search 

ANTs adopts an attribute-based strategy to reduce the time complexity of the novel table search problem (Definition 9). Alternatively, one could consider a tuple-based approximation approach. For instance, entity resolution (also known as record linkage or entity matching) techniques could be applied to estimate the degree of overlap, that is, the number of identical entities, between a query table and candidate tables in the data lake, and then rank the tables such that those with less overlap receive a higher score. Next, we study the application of entity resolution techniques in solving the novel table search problem. Entity resolution focuses on determining whether two tuples refer to the same real-world entity. In this line of work, meth-ods are developed to identify pairs of matching entities from two or more data sources, such as tables [28], [31], [42]–[44]. Exhaustive entity resolution incurs quadratic time complexity with respect to the number of tuples. To improve scalability, blocking techniques are commonly adopted to cluster similar tuples and limit comparisons to candidate pairs within each block, effectively reducing the computational overhead during the matching phase. In performing entity resolution, it is necessary to determine the appropriate blocking and matching approaches to employ. When a query table arrives, it first undergoes a blocking phase, where similar tuples between the query table and each unionable table are identified and grouped into blocks. The subsequent matching step is then restricted to tuple pairs that fall within the same block.    

> (a) Santos (SSNM) (b) Santos (SNM)
> (c) TUS (SSNM) (d) TUS (SNM)
> (e) Ugen-v2 (SSNM) (f) Ugen-v2 (SNM)

Fig. 5: Comparison of SNM (right column) and SSNM (left column) across the Santos, TUS, and Ugen-v2 Small datasets. 

Blocking . Recently, [45] conducted an extensive experimental study of various blocking techniques across multiple well-known datasets, comparing their performance along several dimensions. We base our choice of blocking method on their findings to select the most appropriate technique for our setting. In selecting blocking techniques, we consider the following key characteristics. We favor self-supervised blocking strategies that require neither domain knowledge nor labeled data, as both are impractical in data lake settings due to the absence of metadata and the massive scale of tuples. Con-sequently, we operate in a schema-agnostic setting that does not depend on determining suitable attributes for blocking; instead, each tuple is represented as tokens. Most importantly, the technique must be computationally efficient, particularly in the context of reranking unionable table search results, which is inherently an online process. For instance, we employed the Autoencoder component from the DeepBlocker framework, which has been shown to be effective in prior studies [31], [45]. This approach aligns well with our setup, as it does not require labeled data. However, despite its effectiveness in achieving high precision, we found it to be computationally expensive. In our tests on the Santos dataset, it was proved to be extremely slow and was therefore excluded from our experiments. Specifically, we encountered two major issues: the process consistently required more than our available 512 GB of RAM due to its high memory consumption, and it was very slow, taking over two hours to complete the blocking step for a single query, which led us to halt its execution. The most efficient and effective approach proposed by Neuhof et al. [45] is Random Join, for which no publicly available implementation could be found. Furthermore, we focus on the techniques that does not require non-trivial fine tuning and configurations. Considering all these aspects, we restrict our analysis to two blocking techniques for which publicly available implementations exist: 1) k-Nearest-Neighbor Join ( kNN − Join ) [30] kNN − Join 

was extremely slow; we terminated the KNN (k = 5) run after 16.85 hours, by which time it had processed only four query tables on the Santos dataset (averaging 4.2 hours per table). 2) ScaNN [29] This technique was the fastest, required min-imal parameter tuning, and was less memory-intensive among the available implementations, which is why we selected it. 

E. Normalization 

We describe the syntactic normalization processes that were applied to attributes at two stages of our work. We apply this normalization process to attribute values prior to domain size estimation and syntactic similarity computation. Note that attribute normalization was not performed during the fine-tuning or inference stages of the Starmie model. In the absence of any information about how the tables were created, we treat all tables and attributes uniformly; therefore, the semantics of the normalization function remain identical across all attributes. Given an arbitrary table T ∈

T (A1, . . . , A n), for every tuple t ∈ T where t = ⟨v1, . . . , v n⟩,and for every vk ∈ t, The following steps are performed in the sequence outlined below: i) Tokenization. vk is tokenized, i.e., splitted using spaces, periods, underscores, and dashes as delimiters. We used NLTK’s off-the-shelf regular-expression tokenizers. 14 

ii) Lexical Standardization. The tokens are then converted to lowercase and processed using stemming [46]. iii) Reconstruction. Finally, the normalized tokens are merged back together, preserving their original order and using space character as separators. For example, applying three steps, the string “IT-Hardware Purchases” is normalized to “it hardwar purchas”. The input to the normalization function is a string, and the output is also a string. When computing the Jensen-Shannon distance, we represent the attribute as a multiset of normalized strings to preserve the frequencies; however, for Jaccard similarity computations, we represent the attribute as a set of normalized strings. 

F. Extended Results 

We extended our experiments to include two additional baselines, StarmieOne and StarmieGold . In this section, we 

> 14 https://www .nltk .org/api/nltk .tokenize .regexp .html

TABLE V: Each cell displays the average percentage (%) of queries in each dataset that yield a blatant duplicate within the top l results, average computed over the range l ∈ [2 , 10] and across all queries in each dataset.                     

> StarmieStarmieGoldStarmieOneGMC ER SemNovANTs
> Santos 99.4 99 99 81.9 8.6 00
> TUS 100 100 100 99.5 000
> Ugen-v2 100 100 100 98.8 43.6 52.6 43.9

TABLE VI: Each cell presents the average search novelty score across queries of Ugen v2 small.                  

> Starmie StarmieGold StarmieOne GMC ER SemNov ANTs
> l= 2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0040 0.3715 0.3840 0.3911
> l= 3 0.0074 0.0076 0.0074 0.0066 0.2387 0.2417 0.2478

revisit the previously reported results, now incorporating these two baselines into the comparison. StarmieGold is similar to Starmie , but replaces its built-in alignment with ground-truth alignment. Attributes are represented using Starmie em-beddings and aligned based on ground-truth mappings. The unionability score is then computed as the sum of cosine similarities between aligned attribute pairs, and retrieved tables are ranked accordingly. We also introduce a variant called 

StarmieOne , which computes the unionability score as the average of cosine similarities instead of the sum as done in Starmie . Our analysis shows that the different variants of 

Starmie have little to no impact on the evaluated metrics (see Figures 5 and 6, and Tables V and VI). 

Fig. 6: The graph is the complete version of Figure 4. 

G. Complete Results 

We report the results for F values for all l ∈ [2 , 10] across all datasets and systems in Table VII. 

H. ANTs Versus DUST 

We compare ANTs with DUST , a recent technique for unionable tuple search proposed by Khatiwada et al. [34]. We evaluate how novel the results returned by DUST are by computing the search novelty score (Definition 8), compare TABLE VII: Average percentage of queries for which ANTs 

achieves equal or higher F values evaluated over l values from 2 to 10. Cases where the percentage exceeds 50% are highlighted. For readability, we omit the percentage sign and write each value as X

instead of X% in the table.                                                                                                                                                                           

> 2345678910
> Santos
> Starmie 68.6 54.3 54.3 48.6 54.3 51.4 48.6 45.7 48.6
> StarmieGold 68.6 48.6 51.2 42.9 42.9 42.9 40 40 40
> StarmieOne 68.6 48.6 54.3 48.6 57.1 51.4 48.6 48.6 51.4
> GMC 5.7 2.9 0002.9 5.7 02.9
> ER 65.7 62.9 62.9 65.7 68.6 62.9 65.7 60 54.3
> SemNov 94.3 91.4 91.4 94.3 91.4 85.7 88.6 85.7 82.9
> TUS
> Starmie 69 69 66.7 66.7 66.7 66.7 66.7 66.7 66.7
> StarmieGold 69 69 69 61.9 59.5 57.1 42.9 35.7 38.1
> StarmieOne 69 69 66.7 66.7 66.7 66.7 69 71.4 69
> GMC 14.3 2.4 2.4 02.4 4.8 4.8 2.4 2.4
> ER 71.4 64.3 61.9 66.7 81 78.6 88.1 85.7 73.8
> SemNov 83.3 88.1 88.1 78.6 73.8 71.4 73.8 66.7 66.7
> Ugen-v2 small
> Starmie 5.3 036.8 36.8 57.9 57.9 63.2 63.2 73.7
> StarmieGold 52.3 036.8 31.6 57.9 57.9 63.2 63.2 68.4
> StarmieOne 5.3 026.3 36.8 57.9 57.9 63.2 63.2 73.7
> GMC 0031.6 36.8 57.9 57.9 63.2 63.2 73.7
> ER 78.9 89.5 84.2 84.2 84.2 89.5 84.2 89.5 84.2
> SemNov 78.9 78.9 84.2 78.9 94.7 84.2 84.2 84.2 89.5

these scores to those of ANTs . As reported in Section VII, computing the novelty score is prohibitively time-consuming, so we focus this analysis on the Ugen-v2 dataset. For both systems, we set the number of unionable tables in the initial search result to k = 20 ; For each query, we first obtain from 

ANTs the most unionable table and denote its number of tuples by m. We then ask DUST to retrieve the m most unionable tuples for the same query. We compute and compare the novelty of the result tables using the nscore metric. On average over all queries, the most novel tables returned by 

ANTs contain m = 23 tuples. Table IV reports, for each method, the average novelty score, the average total number of retrieved tables and tuples required to attain that score, the resulting number of novel tuples, and the corresponding running time. While DUST achieves a higher novelty score than ANTs (7.6% gain), it does so only after retrieving, on average, five times more tables and eighteen times more tuples than ANTs , and incurring a substantially higher execution time. We therefore conclude that, in data-market settings where an acquisition cost is attached to each tuple, or in latency-sensitive scenarios, ANTs is a much better choice. 

I. ANTs for Machine Learning Task 

The goal of data discovery is to prepare data for downstream tasks. In this section, we demonstrate how using our novelty-aware data discovery method, ANTs , affects the performance of a machine learning model. We arbitrarily select a repre-sentative downstream task, i.e., rating prediction, and a freely available dataset, the IMDb Extensive Dataset. 15 We then train models under three configurations: no data discovery, relying only on the query table ( Baseline ); augmenting the query table with tables returned by Starmie and augmenting it with 

> 15 https://www .kaggle .com/datasets/simhyunsu/imdbextensivedataset

tables returned by Starmie and reranked by ANTs .16 Next, we explain the experimental setup in detail. 

1) Data Preparation: We use movie metadata (title, year, genre, director, actors, duration, budget, etc.) where the av-erage user rating for each movie is given by the avg_vote 

attribute. The ML task is to train a regression model to predict 

avg_vote from the metadata features. The IMDb movie table is randomly split into training (80%) and test (20%) datasets. From the training set, we randomly select 1% of the tuples and partition them into three distinct query tables, each retaining all predictive attributes (features). We then construct a synthetic data lake from the remaining training tuples, following the procedure proposed by Nargesian et al. [1]. This process yields three query tables and 50 unionable tables in the data lake. To ensure that the training dataset contains sufficient redundant information, we run our experiments using both the original data lake and a diluted variant with dilution degree 

0.4, where the query table is included in the data lake, yielding a total of 101 unionable tables. We rely on standard evaluation metrics for regression models namely, R2 Scores (higher is better) and RMSE Scores (lower is better). 17 

2) Model Selection: First, we select three well-known re-gression models: Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM), Random Forest (RF), and XGBoost (XGB). For each query table, we train these models on the union of randomly selected tables from the non-diluted data lake (including the query table itself) and report performance averaged over the three queries. As shown in Table VIII, LGBM consistently outperforms the other models across all values of k for both R2 and RMSE. We hypothesize that this performance gain is due to the way LGBM internally handles ⊥, which is particularly advantageous in our setting, where the construction of the result table (Equation (3)) introduces ⊥ values. Therefore, we select LGBM as our regression model for comparing the performance of different table discovery techniques. 

3) Results: Tables IX and X summarize the performance of LGBM on the diluted and non-diluted training sets. On the diluted dataset, where redundancy is guaranteed, ANTs consis-tently outperforms both Starmie and Baseline for all values of 

k and for both R2 and RMSE. We assess significance using paired t-tests ( p-value ≤ 0.05 ); improvements over Baseline 

are significant; all improvements over Starmie are statistically significant except for k=5 . On the non-diluted dataset, for both R2 and RMSE, ANTs significantly outperforms Baseline ,but no significant difference is observed between ANTs and 

Starmie .Overall, we conclude that in the presence of redundancy, reranking the results of Starmie with ANTs is clearly prefer-able. Even in the non-diluted setting, the reranking step is not detrimental; thus, the novelty-aware reranker can always be safely applied, even when the redundancy level of the dataset is unknown.     

> 16 We first retrieve the top-30 tables using Starmie and then apply ANTs
> to rerank the result.
> 17 We created and evaluated all models using the standard APIs provided by scikit-learn https://scikit-learn .org.

TABLE VIII: R 2 and RMSE of all three models trained on the Random data selection from non-diluted data lake. The best value of each metric across models for each k is shown in 

boldface .                                           

> R2RMSE
> kLGBM XGB RF LGBM XGB RF 20.4447 0.2714 0.2360 0.9194 1.0506 1.0752 30.4671 0.2790 0.2524 0.9007 1.0454 1.0638 40.4577 0.2694 0.2164 0.9086 1.0526 1.0878 50.4554 0.2702 0.2077 0.9105 1.0516 1.0933 60.4565 0.2697 0.2075 0.9095 1.0517 1.0930 70.4366 0.2155 0.1567 0.9262 1.0923 1.1307 80.4322 0.2553 0.2338 0.9299 1.0649 1.0802 90.4335 0.2530 0.2358 0.9288 1.0666 1.0788 10 0.4352 0.2559 0.2377 0.9274 1.0645 1.0774

J. Ablation Study: Impact of Alignment Quality 

In this study, we examine how alignment correctness affects the effectiveness of our methods by replacing the ground-truth alignment with an automatically generated one. Leveraging the codebase from a recent related work [34], we employ a clustering-based approach to align attributes between a query table and data lake tables. 18 Similar to this work [34], our objective is to form clusters that each contain exactly one query column paired with its corresponding aligned attributes from the data lake tables. Based on domain knowledge, we enforce the constraint that no two columns from the same table may be clustered together (i.e., aligned to a single query attribute). For attribute representations, we utilize the column-level RoBERTa model, the best-performing model in [34] and apply the Silhouette coefficient [47] to determine the optimal number of clusters. With a slight modification to their code, we adopt K-means clustering augmented with a cannot-link 

constraint [48] using Cosine distance, which yields improved results. The K-means clustering algorithm’s codebase is freely available for download [49]. We use this alignment method for 

GMC , SemNov , ER , and ANTs . Starmie , however, includes its own built-in alignment procedure. We have alignment ground truth for all datasets and are therefore able to report the alignment algorithm’s precision, recall, and F-measure, as shown in Table XI. As anticipated, replacing manual alignment with an automatic alignment algorithm consistently harms performance. In terms of SSNM (Figure 7), it reduces the performance of ANTs , SemNov , and GMC in 11 out of 12 (system, dataset) configurations (92%). Similarly, it degrades the SNM of ANTs and SemNov in 89% of the configurations (Figure 8). However, even under these conditions, ANTs 

remains the best-performing system in 48% and 89% of (dataset, l) settings for SSNM and SNM, respectively, when restricted to Ugen-v2 queries with more than 12 unionable tables. Interestingly, ER exhibits improved performance on the Santos dataset, for both SSNM and SNM. 

> 18 https://github .com/northeastern-datalab/dust

(a) Santos (b) Santos 

(c) TUS (d) TUS 

(e) Ugen-v2 (f) Ugen-v2 

Fig. 7: System performance (using the alignment algorithm) across datasets for SSNM (left) and SNM (right), for l ∈ [2 , 10] . Y-axis truncated. 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 8: Results on Ugen-v2 queries with more than 12 unionable tables (Ugen12); automatic alignment is used. 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 9: Results on Ugen-v2 queries with more than 12 unionable tables (Ugen12). TABLE IX: RMSE (lower is better) and R2 (higher is better) by k on the diluted dataset. The values are averaged over the results for three query tables. Gain is the relative change of ANTs vs. Starmie. For each metric, the best value in a row is 

boldfaced .                                                                                 

> RMSE R2
> kBaseline Starmie ANTs Gain Baseline Starmie ANTs Gain 20.8975 0.8544 0.8373 −2.00% 0.4711 0.5206 0.5396 +3 .65%
> 3–0.8553 0.8324 −2.68% –0.5196 0.5450 +4 .89%
> 4–0.8471 0.8364 −1.26% –0.5288 0.5406 +2 .24%
> 5–0.8507 0.8380 −1.49% –0.5248 0.5389 +2 .69%
> 6–0.8512 0.8383 −1.52% –0.5242 0.5385 +2 .72%
> 7–0.8524 0.8378 −1.71% –0.5229 0.5391 +3 .10%
> 8–0.8504 0.8381 −1.45% –0.5252 0.5388 +2 .59%
> 9–0.8514 0.8384 −1.53% –0.5240 0.5384 +2 .74%
> 10 –0.8532 0.8405 −1.49% –0.5219 0.5361 +2 .71%

TABLE X: RMSE (lower is better) and R2 (higher is better) by k on the non-diluted dataset. The values are averaged over the results for three query tables. Gain is the relative change of ANTs vs. Starmie. For each metric, the best value in a row is 

boldfaced .                                                                                 

> RMSE R2
> kBaseline Starmie ANTs Gain Baseline Starmie ANTs Gain 20.8975 0.8378 0.8373 −0.06% 0.4711 0.5391 0.5396 +0 .09%
> 3–0.8359 0.8324 −0.42% –0.5412 0.5450 +0 .71%
> 4–0.8359 0.8364 +0 .06% –0.5411 0.5406 −0.10%
> 5–0.8380 0.8380 0.00% –0.5389 0.5389 +0 .01%
> 6–0.8375 0.8383 +0 .10% –0.5394 0.5385 −0.17%
> 7–0.8378 0.8378 0.00% –0.5391 0.5391 −0.003%
> 8–0.8388 0.8381 −0.08% –0.5380 0.5388 +0 .14%
> 9–0.8392 0.8394 +0 .02% –0.5375 0.5373 −0.04%
> 10 –0.8396 0.8418 +0 .26% –0.5371 0.5347 −0.44%

TABLE XI: Effectiveness of the Alignment Algorithm. Santos TUS Ugen-v2 Precision 0.80 0.88 0.96 Recall 0.81 0.62 0.95 F-measure 0.78 0.70 0.95 

TABLE XII: The average percentage of queries per dataset yielding a blatant duplicate within the top l results ( l ∈ [2 , 10] ), using automatic alignment. Lower values indicate better performance. In all tables, Bold numbers show the best performance per row; underlined numbers indicate the second best.                                

> Starmie GMC ER SemNov ANTs
> Santos 99.4% 89.2% 3.5% 4.1% 3.5%
> TUS 100% 100% 2.4% 3.2% 5.3%
> Ugen-v2 100% 69% 84% 85% 84.8%
> Ugen12 100% 22.2% 61% 61% 61%
> Ugen l= 2 100% 100% 47.4% 52.6% 47.4%

K. Ablation Study: Hyperparameter Effects 

There are two key parameters in our method: the domain-size threshold s and the penalization degree b. In our main experiments, we set these values empirically based on a small-scale parameter exploration and we use s = 20 and b = 1 

for all datasets. In this ablation study, we investigate their impact on the effectiveness of ANTs . We adopt a two-stage (sequential) hyperparameter-tuning strategy: we first tune s

and, conditional on its selected value, we then tune b. In the first stage, we fix the penalization degree at b = 1 and report SNM and SSNM for s ∈ { 5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , 30 , 35 }, averaged over all queries and all l ∈ [2 , 10] across the three benchmarks. As shown in Figures 10a and 10b, the value of s that yields the best SNM and SSNM is 10 for Santos, 5, 10 , or 15 for TUS, and 10 , 15 , or 20 for Ugen-v2. This confirms that s

should be selected in a data-dependent manner. Next, we fix 

s = 10 , its optimal value across all datasets, and report results for penalization degrees b ∈ [1 , 10] . As shown in Figures 10c and 10d, for TUS both SNM and SSNM attain their maximum for b ∈ [1 , 5] . On Santos, SNM is relatively stable and less sensitive to b than SSNM; both metrics reach their maximum for b ∈ [4 , 10] . For Ugen-v2, SNM is maximized for any b ∈

[2 , 10] , while SSNM is not noticeably affected by b.

L. Ablation Study: Effect of the Initial Search System 

In this section, we examine how the novelty of the initial search results influences the effectiveness of our novelty-aware reranker. Specifically, we aim to answer the following ques-tion: How does the ratio of diluted to non-diluted tables, used as a proxy for redundancy in the initial results fed to ANTs ,affect the final SSNM and SNM scores? To this end, we replace the initial search results with synthetic, randomly generated result sets, where we control the fraction of diluted tables returned by a hypothetical unionable table search system. (a) (b)  

> (c) (d)

Fig. 10: Effect of different values of b and s on ANTs ’s effective-ness, measured by SNM and SSNM. All values are averaged over all queries and all l ∈ [2 , 10] . 

> (a) (b)

Fig. 11: Impact of initial search result’s redundancy on ANTs ’performance, averaged over all queries in each dataset. 

We then feed these synthetic results to ANTs and evaluate the novelty of the reranked lists. Ideally, we would report the novelty scores of the reranked result (Definition 8), but computing them proved prohibitively time-consuming. Instead, we report SSNM and SNM for different values of the diluted tables ratio. For each dataset we fix the size of the initial random result to 15 tables and include all queries from that dataset. We then ask ANTs to rerank these 15 tables and select 10 tables as the final output. As shown in Figure 11a, increasing the ratio of diluted tables in the initial search result is clearly detrimental to ANTs ’performance on all datasets in terms of SSNM. As the redundancy of the initial result set increases, ANTs ’ effectiveness decreases. This decrease is gradual at first, indicating that reranking with ANTs is capable of handling moderate levels of redundancy. However, once the fraction of diluted tables exceeds 40% on Santos and TUS, and approximately 70% on Ugen-v2, the performance drop becomes much steeper. A similar pattern holds for SNM on Santos and TUS (Figure 11b). For Ugen-v2, however, the dataset is much sparser: most queries have only a small number of unionable tables and the target ratios cannot always be achieved. This explains the unusual increases observed around the 40% and 70% ratio.