The Canonical Order Problem: When Large Language Models Are
Unreliable Knowledge Bases for Multi-Valued Relations
Timo Pierre Schrader1 Annemarie Friedrich1 Simon Razniewski2 Lukas Lange3
1University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
2ScaDS.AI & TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
3Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
lukas.lange@de.bosch.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increas-
ingly used as knowledge bases (KBs) due to
the vast amount of knowledge they acquire dur-
ing pre-training. While many works focus on
extracting single relational triples, most real-
world relations are multi-valued and require
generating sets of entities.
In this paper, we investigate how LLMs repre-
sent and generate multi-valued relations. We
identify the canonical order problem: The
probabilistic distributions inside LLMs orga-
nize many multi-valued relations according
to a canonical ordering (e.g., alphabetical or
chronological). Through mechanistic analysis,
we show that set generation in LLMs can be
thought of in terms of three phases: (1) retrieval
of candidate entities, (2) internal sorting, and
(3) selection of the next element. As a result,
prompts aiming to construct KBs that deviate
from this internal canonical ordering lead to a
markedly reduced reliability of LLMs when
aiming to generate complete sets for multi-
valued relations.
1
Introduction
Due to their pre-training on huge amounts of text, large
language models (LLMs) possess broad knowledge im-
plicitly stored in their parameters. This renders LLMs
particularly interesting for the extraction of structured
knowledge to construct knowledge bases (KBs, Hu et al.,
2024; Pinto et al., 2025). Most existing work focuses on
single-valued relations (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,
2020; Singhania et al., 2023). In practice, much rela-
tional knowledge is organized into sets such as “all For-
mula 1 world champions,” “all official EU languages,”
or “all Turing Award winners.” To extract this knowl-
edge from an LLM, the model has to generate a set of
entities. In practice, this leads to two main issues: (1) el-
ements are omitted during generation (Recall problem)
and (2) the generation of additional wrong elements
(Precision problem).
Despite the practical importance of multi-valued rela-
tions, little is known about how LLM parameters store
such information, or what happens when we attempt to
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
27B
12B
4B
1B
Gemma
0-shot
First element
Random element
Random sequence
20B
GPT-OSS
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Recall
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Precision
3.1 8B
3.2 3B
Llama
0.7
0.8
Recall
7B
Mistral
Figure 1: Precision-recall curves for LLM set generation
across 37 topics. We compare four distinct settings:
• without any examples; ■with the first element in
canonical order; □with a single random element; and
△with randomly shuffled elements. Providing the first
element as an example always achieves the best results.
retrieve it via prompting and generation. In this paper,
we study the internal mechanisms and challenges when
extracting this type of relational knowledge from LLMs.
Our findings reveal previously overlooked limitations of
using LLMs for KB construction: whether or not they
succeed in retrieving multi-valued relations depends
strongly on the examples provided in the prompt.
We identify the canonical order problem: LLMs
internally organize multi-valued relations according to a
canonical order (e.g., numerical, alphabetical, or chrono-
logical), which causes poor reliability when the genera-
tion process deviates from this order. This finding shows
that in this context, LLMs do not “store” relational infor-
mation consistently but rather that their output depends
on whether prompts reflect canonical orders observed
during pretraining. As an example, we consider retriev-
ing all 16 states of Germany. If we ask a model such
as Gemma-3 12B to come up with all 16 states, it will
most likely generate all of them in alphabetical order.
However, if we ask it to complete a random subset of 9
states, it for example tends to forget Bremen in its final
arXiv:2609.36209v1  [cs.CL]  28 Sep 2026


output. Figure 1 illustrates this effect across 37 topics
and multiple model families. We compare four prompt-
ing strategies: no example at all, the first element in
canonical order, a single randomly chosen element, and
a set of randomly shuffled elements. In all cases, provid-
ing the first element in canonical order yields the most
complete and accurate sets, while forcing the model to
continue from shuffled elements leads to substantially
more omissions and errors.
To better understand this model behavior, we perform
a mechanistic analysis. We analyze the autoregressive
generation process by inspecting the outputs of each
Transformer block and how expected entities behave in
the hidden states. Our mechanistic analysis suggests
that activation in earlier Transformer layers reflect all
set entities equally (reflecting the overall topic similar
to a retrieval step) and that the following layers in-
creasingly reflect canonical orderings (sorting), which
becomes problematic when prompts propose example
set entities that are not at the beginning of the canonical
ordering. This implies that multi-valued knowledge ex-
traction from LLMs is more reliable when they do not
have to deviate from a canonical order. We argue that
the observed behavior limits the reliability of zero-shot
LLMs as KBs, since the correctness of generated sets
depends not only on the stored facts but also on the
generation order.
2
Related Work
In this section, we review related work on using LLMs
for KB construction, using LLMs in combination with
structured knowledge and multi-valued relations, order-
ing problems in LLMs, and approaches to mechanistic
analyses of LLMs.
Language Models for KB Construction
The knowl-
edge implicitly stored in language models is widely used
for constructing KBs (Petroni et al., 2019; AlKhamissi
et al., 2022). GPTKB (Hu et al., 2024) extracts 105 mil-
lion relations from GPT-4o mini, greatly exceeding the
number of entries in well-known KBs such as Wikidata
(Vrandeˇci´c and Krötzsch, 2014) and YAGO (Suchanek
et al., 2007). A multi-turn scheme for extracting rela-
tional triples is introduced by Zhang and Soh (2024),
where free-form LLM-based extraction is followed by
canonicalization of generated relations into a general
schema.
Another branch of KB construction uses the language
understanding capabilities of LLMs to extract relational
triples from documents. A pipeline for extracting re-
lational triples from text given a priori retrieved con-
text from an existing KB is proposed by Papaluca et al.
(2024). Applications in materials science demonstrate
how LLMs can extract knowledge from tabular data
for KG construction (Dreger et al., 2025). Earlier ap-
proaches leverage encoder-based language models to
treat relation extraction as a classification task (Wei
et al., 2020).
We position our work as an analysis of the interme-
diate step of knowledge elicitation from LLMs before
actually building up a KB. Although the generated sets
of tail entities could be used for constructing a KB, we
aim to understand how LLMs internally represent and
generate relational knowledge.
LLMs and Multi-Valued Relations
There are two
main facets when dealing with multi-valued relations
in the context of LLMs: extraction and editing. On
the extraction side, Singhania et al. (2023) probe BERT
encoders (Devlin et al., 2019) using masked language
modeling to generate candidate entities.
Different
heuristics for selecting candidate sets are explored,
such as top-k selection or probability thresholds de-
rived from model logits. In contrast, our work focuses
on analyzing set generation in autoregressive decoder-
based models rather than proposing selection heuris-
tics. Decoder-based LLMs benefit from broader general-
purpose knowledge due to next-token prediction objec-
tives and typically larger parameter counts. On the
editing side, encoder-decoder models are fine-tuned to
generate either individual instances or complete sets
(Nagasawa et al., 2023). While high output accuracy
can be achieved, this often comes at the cost of reduced
generalizability.
LLMs and Structured Knowledge
Research in this
area investigates how structured knowledge can be pro-
cessed, generated, or integrated with LLMs. This in-
cludes tabular data (Agarwal et al., 2025; Zhou et al.,
2025a; Liu et al., 2024b), KGs (Zhou et al., 2025b;
Regino and dos Reis, 2025; Zhu et al., 2025), databases
(Qin et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023), natural language doc-
uments via retrieval-augmented generation (Wahidur
et al., 2025; Arslan et al., 2024), and ontologies (Mai
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025). Our work focuses on
structured knowledge in the form of lists, which may be
stored in documents or generated directly as responses.
Influence of Orderings in Language Models
The
ordering of few-shot demonstrations has been shown to
strongly affect the accuracy of autoregressive language
models, for example, the ordering in which demonstra-
tions are presented to models in few-shot prompts (Lu
et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2021). It has also been shown
that learning relational knowledge of the form A ≡B
does not necessarily imply learning the reverse relation
B ≡A (Berglund et al., 2024). The effect of input
ordering on reasoning performance is further explored
in multi-document question answering and logical rea-
soning tasks (Liu et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024). Per-
formance degrades when relevant information appears
later in the prompt but improves again when placed
near the end, forming a U-shaped curve (Liu et al.,
2024a). Similarly, deviations from natural premise or-
dering negatively impact reasoning accuracy, especially
as the number of premises increases (Chen et al., 2024).
While existing work focuses on input ordering, we inves-
tigate the extent to which ordering is inherent in stored


knowledge.
Mechanistic Analysis of LLMs
Understanding the
internal mechanisms of language models has been a
long-standing goal in interpretability research. A ma-
jor line of work focuses on attribution methods that
assign importance scores to input features. Integrated
Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017) is a widely used
method based on axiomatic principles such as sensitivity
and implementation invariance. Second-order methods
have also been proposed to analyze interactions between
modalities in dual encoder models (Moeller et al., 2025),
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
In language models, attention analysis is commonly
used to study information flow in Transformer architec-
tures (Abnar and Zuidema, 2020; Clark et al., 2019; Jain
and Wallace, 2019). In this work, we employ the logit
lens technique, which projects hidden states onto the
vocabulary space by applying the final normalization
and language modeling head. This method has been
used to analyze where factual knowledge is stored in
multilingual LLMs (Wang et al., 2025), to study social
biases (Prakash and Lee, 2023), and to investigate visual
feature representations in vision-language models (Huo
et al., 2024).
3
Theoretical Concepts
Background
We define multi-valued relations as sets
of entities S(t) = {e1, . . . , en} that are in an “isA” rela-
tion with head node h. Such relations can be represented
as sparse or dense KGs with one node for each entity
connecting it to the head as illustrated in Figure 2.
Following standard relation extraction terminology,
we also call the head node the relations subject and the
dependent node its entities.
Subsets and Prefixes
We define set prefixes to be an
unordered true subset P(t′) ⊂S(t). Although we use
the term “prefix”, these subsets carry no ordering infor-
mation; the term reflects their role as a starting point
that the model must continue during generation. For
example, a prefix for the states in Germany might be
P(t′) = {Bremen, Saxony}. Set prefixes will be used
in this paper to test how robustly LLMs can complete
true subsets of the expected set while deviating from
a canonical order. Starting with such prefixes reflects
a realistic scenario in knowledge base curation: practi-
tioners typically have partial knowledge about the multi-
valued relations they aim to collect. For example, a
knowledge engineer might already know that Bavaria is
a state in Germany, and this partial information naturally
suggests exploring related queries, such as “Besides
Bavaria, what other states are located in Germany?”
This approach is motivated by few-shot learning meth-
ods where providing explanatory examples significantly
improves model performance and guides the completion
process (Brown et al., 2020; JIANG et al., 2025). By
starting with k prefix elements, we simulate this work-
flow while testing how robustly LLMs can complete
true subsets despite deviating from canonical orderings.
In our experiments, set prefixes enable us to analyze
(1) how well LLMs can extend partial knowledge, and
(2) whether the presence of non-canonical orderings
in the prefix disrupts the completion of remaining set
elements.
Auto-Regressive LLM Generation Process
LLMs
are statistical distributions that model the probability of
the next token at each decoding step j:
LLM : V 7→[0, 1],
X
t∈V
P(Tj = t) = 1
This mapping assumes a normalization function that
is applied on the LLM logits such as softmax. The joint
distribution over a sequence of tokens (T1, . . . , Tn) can
be decomposed using conditional probabilities:
P(T1, . . . , Tn) = P(T1)
n
Y
j=2
P(Tj | T1, . . . , Tj−1)
This decomposition allows us to inspect each auto-
regressive decoding step j individually. Hence, we can
inspect how likely each token t ∈V is to be gener-
ated at each step. We inspect these probabilities to
learn where “missed” elements that are never accurately
verbalized are ranked in the probability distribution dur-
ing generation. Furthermore, due to the discrete gen-
eration process, we can determine “points of interest”
at which we look deeper into the hidden states of a
Transformer-based LLM, which is defined as the output
of one Transformer block (attention combined with two
linear layers). We provide details in Section 5.
4
Methodology
This section describes the creation of our dataset for
prompting LLMs to extract sets of entities for given
multi-valued relations. We then analyze the LLMs’
probability distribution while generating particular set
items and analyze the relationship between missed items
and canonical orderings.
Dataset
We first create a dataset that consists of 37
distinct multi-valued relations for which we can prompt
an LLM to come up with all entities that occur as enti-
ties. These relations, alongside the canonical orderings
of the entities, are listed in Table 1. We ensure that each
relation has a well-defined number of entities without
frequent changes over time. We leave the analysis of
non-stable sets for future work. We sort the topics ac-
cording to the size of the corresponding set of entities
| S(t) | and categorize them into small (| S(t) |< 15),
regular (15 ≤| S(t) |≤50), and large (| S(t) |> 50).
Furthermore, we assign a canonical ordering to each
S(t). In this context, we refer to a canonical order-
ing as a commonly used way of ordering a list of enti-
ties, such as alphabetically, chronologically for temporal
events, or according to other domain-specific criteria
(e.g., the distance of planets from their sun). We assign


Germany
Baden-
Württemberg
Bavaria
Berlin
Brandenburg
Bremen
...
hasState
hasState
hasState
hasState
hasState
hasState
Figure 2: Example demonstrating a multi-valued relation in a KB. The dependent nodes share the same head node
and are connected to it via the same relation type.
the canonical ordering based on the most common con-
vention found in common literature or web sources (e.g.,
Wikipedia).
Evaluation Framework
When analyzing how reli-
ably LLMs can generate complete sets of entities for
multi-valued relations, we treat them as unordered sets
and use precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score for evalua-
tion. To understand what happens inside an LLM during
the autoregressive text generation process, we look at
two distinct parts of the text generation process: (1)
a single forward pass including all hidden states pro-
duced by the Transformer blocks, and (2) the evolution
across all autoregressive forward passes, i.e., all steps
j at which the probability P(Tj = t | Tj−1 . . . T1) is
computed for all tokens t ∈V in the vocabulary. To per-
form a mechanistic analysis, we use the logit lens1 for
interpreting the outputs of hidden states in LLMs. For
each hidden layer, the method takes the k-dimensional
output vector, applies the model’s final normalization
layer followed by the language-modeling head (a linear
layer) that produces the | V | logits for all tokens in
the vocabulary, thus allowing for a language-level inter-
pretation of the hidden states. We can then search for
all expected entities in the (sorted) logits by retrieving
the position of the first subtoken of every entity.2 When
performing this search across sorted logits, we obtain a
relative ranking ˆR as well as an absolute rank between
0 and | V | −1 for each entity. We compare R, the
ranking induced by the canonical ordering (i.e., sorting
the entities by a fixed convention such as alphabetical
or chronological), with ˆR, the ranking implied by the
order in which the LLM generates the entities, using
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ρ to quantify
agreement between the two orderings. For the mecha-
nistic analysis, we treat these sets as ordered.
Prompt Templates
The base instruction for the model
for every set generation experiment and the simulated
start of the model answer are as follows:
1https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/
interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens
2Some entities may share the same initial subtoken, which can
lead to overlapping matches. This is a limitation of the tokenizer
design and introduces ambiguities when mapping entities to vocabu-
lary tokens. Furthermore, we search for subtokens with and without
leading whitespace and select whichever is higher ranked.
User:
Give me a list of all <SUBJECT_NODE>. The list
output should be in bullet point format with the
dash sign (’-’) used as bullet point style.
Assistant:
The following list contains all entities that
belong to <SUBJECT_NODE>: \n
- <OPTIONAL_PREFIX>
For k-prefix experiments, we replace <OPTIONAL_-
PREFIX> with the bullet point list that holds all k prefix
elements.
String Comparison
Finding matching strings in free-
text generation is difficult since exact matches are not
guaranteed due to the model having the freedom of cas-
ing, adding punctuation marks and markdown markers,
spacing, etc.
In order to make the set comparison between
S(t) and
ˆS(t) as robust as possible,
we use
the difflib.SequenceMatcher implementation from
Python, which builds upon the algorithm originally pre-
sented in (Ratcliff et al., 1988). Our threshold is set
to a strict value of 0.95. During our experimentation
phase, this value has been shown to be a good trade-
off. We additionally perform some pre-processing steps
that remove some special signs such as quotation marks
and parentheses that do not contribute to any entity in
a meaningful way. The procedure is shown in Algo-
rithm 1.
Algorithm 1 String Preprocessing
Require: Input string Si
Ensure: Normalized output string So
So ←strip_whitespace(Si)
So ←extract_from_within_md_indicators(So)
So ←remove_enumeration_signs(So)
for each delimiter in ["(", ":", " - ", " – ", " — ",
"\n"] do
So ←So.split(delimiter)[0]
end for
So ←So.lower()
So ←remove_quotation_marks(So)
So ←squeeze_multiple_spaces_into_one(So)


Topic
Count ↓
Ordering
Size
Nobel prize categories
6
other
small
Ancient wonders
7
chronological
small
Newton spectrum colors
7
numerical
small
Crystal systems
7
other
small
Seven seas
7
other
small
Moon phases
8
chronological
small
Solar system planets
8
numerical
small
Beethoven symphonies
9
chronological
small
Poker hands
10
numerical
small
German chancellors
10
chronological
small
Zodiac signs
12
chronological
small
Countries in SA
13
alphabetical
small
Eclipse versions
13
chronological
small
German states
16
alphabetical
regular
MBTI 4-letter types
16
other
regular
Fib. numbers (≤1000)
17
numerical
regular
Standard amino acids
20
alphabetical
regular
MS Office versions
22
chronological
regular
India: official languages
23
alphabetical
regular
Topic
Count ↓
Ordering
Size
EU official languages
24
alphabetical
regular
Bond films
25
chronological
regular
Primes (≤100)
25
numerical
regular
Mammal orders
27
numerical
regular
NBA teams
30
alphabetical
regular
F1 world champions
34
chronological
regular
Shakespeare First Folio
36
chronological
regular
NVIDIA RTX GPUs
36
chronological
regular
U.S. presidents
45
chronological
regular
HTTP status codes
63
numerical
large
U.S. national parks
63
alphabetical
large
Bible books
66
chronological
large
Constellations
88
alphabetical
large
Periodic table elements
118
numerical
large
Primes (≤1000)
168
numerical
large
Physics Nobel laureates
230
chronological
large
Stable nuclides
251
numerical
large
Catholic popes
267
chronological
large
Table 1: The 37 distinct topics in our dataset along with their number of entities | S(t) |, type of canonical ordering,
and categorization into the three set sizes.
5
Results
We start by conducting multi-valued relation generation
experiments to understand how canonical orderings in-
fluence the robustness. We then provide mechanistic
insights into the models to better understand why canoni-
cal orderings play a crucial role inside the LLMs. For set
generation experiments in Section 5.1, we mainly focus
on models from the Gemma-3 model family (Gemma-
Team et al., 2025). We confirm the generalizability of
our findings in an aggregated statistic for models from
the Llama family (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Mistral-0.3
7B (Jiang et al., 2023), and GPT-OSS 20B (OpenAI
et al., 2025). For the mechanistic analyses in Sections
5.2 and 5.3, we use the instruction-tuned Gemma-3 12B
model.
5.1
Robustness of Set Generation
We start with the question of how the choice of start
element affects the reliability of set generation. This
provides a first indication of how LLMs are influenced
by orderings.
To do that, we compare four settings: (1) no start
element, (2) a start element from the first position, (3)
a single start element from any position, and (4) an
average across 25 runs with randomly shuffled start
elements. We embed these start elements by pre-filling
them in the model’s response so that the model is asked
to generate all remaining entities while being forced to
work with a prefix of 1 or k start elements. Contrasting
settings (3) and (4) isolates the effect of the amount of
deviation from the canonical order: a single misplaced
element already perturbs generation, and the disruption
grows as more shuffled elements are forced into the
prefix.
Table 2 shows the influence of different types of start
1B
4B
12B
27B
Example(s)
S
R
L
S
R
L
S
R
L
S
R
L
0-shot
56.9 36.2 36.3 78.7 79.1 50.2 92.5 89.7 80.9 86.4 88.4 85.1
First
61.3 51.8 36.4 84.7 85.5 66.2 92.2 87.4 82.6 89.7 89.9 83.4
1 Random
53.0 46.8 24.6 77.5 74.7 49.6 90.1 83.3 72.8 88.6 87.7 81.6
k Random
42.2 34.7 13.0 69.1 58.3 34.6 84.7 73.9 48.2 83.9 77.9 57.5
Table 2: Average F1 (%) for models in the Gemma-3
family, split by set sizes and prefix strategy. S = small,
R = regular, L = large.
elements across model sizes in the Gemma-3 family and
across set sizes categories. From the results, we observe
that providing the first element according to a canoni-
cal ordering is beneficial compared to having no start
element at all as it provides a strong signal about the
expected ordering and composition of the multi-valued
relation.3 Furthermore, forcing the model to continue
from randomly shuffled multiple start elements substan-
tially decreases the robustness of set generation by a
large margin, indicating that “disrupting” the canonical
ordering leads to instabilities in the generation. Fig-
ure 1 displays the same tendencies across more model
families aggregated over all list size categories.
We further observe that the negative effect of shuffled
prefixes grows with the size of the target set: the gap
between the canonical (first-element) and shuffled set-
tings is largest for large sets across all model sizes. We
hypothesize that this occurs because larger sets leave
more room for the model to deviate from the canoni-
cal order, and the autoregressive pre-training can bias
LLMs toward storing multi-valued relations as ordered
sequences rather than independent triples.
3In the case of 0-prefixes, the LLMs often tend to be more verbose
in their output, e.g., adding additional information in parentheses or
writing full sentences after the bullet points.


−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ρ
Spearman Rank Correlations (Average over all lists)
Start element
First
20%
40%
Middle
60%
80%
Last
0
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
Hidden Layer
100
101
102
103
104
105
Position in Logit Space
Start element: Mercury
Absolute Token Positions (Planets of our Solar System)
Venus
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Figure 3: (a) Evolution of the Spearman correlation be-
tween expected and generated positions in each hidden
layer of the first forward pass. We evaluate different
choices for the 1-prefix position. Shaded areas mark ±
1 standard deviation. (b) Evolution of the absolute ranks
in the sorted logit space for the 1-prefix Mercury. Both
demonstrate that the canonical ordering emerges in the
middle layers of the model.
In sum, providing a single start element follow-
ing the canonical ordering can elicit multi-valued
relations from LLMs more robustly, while deviating
from this order hurts the robustness. In the follow-
ing, we analyze mechanistically why sticking to the
canonical order leads to better results.
5.2
Analysis of Prevalence of Canonical Orderings
In this section, we address the question of in which
layers the canonical ordering of the target set is vis-
ible in the hidden states, and how this ordering be-
haves across consecutive forward passes.
Single Forward Pass
We begin by investigating the
initial forward pass. We instruct the model to generate
the set of entities ˆS(t) for a given topic. Furthermore,
we extend the prompt with a short introductory phrase
followed by a bullet point, ensuring that the first gener-
ated token corresponds to an entity in the set.
The top plot of Figure 3 shows the evolution of the
correlation coefficients ρ in all 48 hidden layers of
Gemma-3-12B. As explained in Section 4, we compute
the correlation between the expected canonical order of
entities and their actual relative ranks. These values are
averaged across the 12 topics in our dataset for which
computation of all logit lens values is tractable.4
It becomes evident that up to approximately layer
25-30, there is almost the same correlation between the
expected (inferred by the canonical order) and actual
4ancient world wonders, books of the Bible, Nobel prize categories,
countries in South America, distinct F1 world champions, MBTI
personality types, official languages in India, official languages in the
EU, phases of the moon, planets of our solar system, poker hands,
states in Germany
relative positions regardless of the input element. Begin-
ning from layer 30, the model begins to be influenced
by which entity is provided as the starting example.
When using an element from the first position there is
a medium-high correlation of around 0.5, consistent
with the model internally retrieving an ordered repre-
sentation of the target set. This correlation gradually
drops the more the starting element is taken from the
end of the set. Interestingly, for a start element from the
last position (e.g., Neptune), there is no highly negative
correlation. The visualized standard deviations of the
red and purple lines further show that this finding holds
across a variety of topics. We interpret this as evidence
that the model internally stores a representation aligned
with a canonical ordering, while forcing it to deviate
from it shows signs of the model losing any structured
order. We hypothesize that this behavior arises primarily
from the pre-training data distribution, where entities
belonging to such sets are most often encountered in
their canonical ordering.
Exemplary Topic
To further understand the inner
workings of set generation during the first forward pass,
we examine the multi-valued relation “planets of our
solar system” as an example using Mercury as the start-
ing element, following the canonical ordering. The
bottom plot of Figure 3 depicts the absolute ranks of
the logits corresponding to the remaining seven planets.
Beginning around layer 20, the model starts to “pull”
all necessary entities to top positions in the sorted logit
space.
Referring to the bottom plot of Figure 3, it becomes
clear that once entities have been pulled to the top of
the logit space, the model begins to sort them according
to its internal ordering. Summarizing the findings of
both plots, we can define the following phases of multi-
valued relation generation in LLMs: (1) retrieval of
relevant entities, (2) sorting of the retrieved elements,
and (3) selection of the next element to be generated.
Spearman Correlation Values for different Models
Figure 4 shows the difference across hidden layers of
the first forward pass between the correlation values
ρ when using the first element and the last element as
starting element of the set. We can see that our findings
generalize to a variety of multi-valued relations and that
approx. the last third of layers is where the internalized
canonical order plays the most important role.
Across Forward Passes
Figure 5 displays the average
values of ρ for the different starting elements described
above but this time across the last hidden states of all
decoding steps, i.e., the hidden states that are used to
compute the model’s output predictions. We observe
very similar tendencies, with later start elements leading
to low correlation with the canonical ordering. Note that
with an increasing number of generated set elements, the
correlation with the canonical order for the remaining
elements increases as there are fewer degrees of freedom
for the model.


0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of Layers
Llama 3.1 8B
Llama 3.2 3B
Mistral 0.3 7B
GPT-OSS 20B
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
∆Spearman (Pos. 0 −Pos. 1)
Figure 4: Difference of correlation values ρ when using
the first and last element as start element across the
hidden layers of the first forward pass.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Decoding Steps Completed
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−0.25
ρ
Spearman Rank Correlations Over All Decoding Steps
Start element
First
20%
40%
Middle
60%
80%
Last
Figure 5: Evolution of the Spearman correlation values
between expected positions and actual positions across
the last hidden states of all decoding steps. Shaded areas
indicate ±1 standard deviation.
5.3
Evolution of Absolute Ranks and Missing
Elements
In this section, we look at how entities that are ulti-
mately missing from the generated output behave in
the logit space during decoding. For this, we examine
the much larger set of all “Formula 1 world champi-
ons” as an example and compare two runs: one with
the first-ever world champion (Giuseppe Farina) as start
element and one with Max Verstappen as start element,
who is the most recent world champion w.r.t. the knowl-
edge cutoff dates of most LLMs. For all champions,
we track the absolute rank of their first subtoken in the
sorted logit space across all forward passes in which the
generation of a new entity begins.5
Figure 6 shows the set generation process of all F1
world champions, including the absolute ranks at each
entity generation start. The rows are sorted in ascending
order, starting with the earliest world champion (depend-
ing on the prefix used) in the first row. A cell marked
with a star indicates that the driver of this row was cho-
sen at the corresponding generation step. White cells
indicate absolute positions larger than 50. We can see
that drivers that have been generated only play a mi-
nor role in subsequent decoding steps, regardless of the
canonical ordering. What we can see is that deviating
from the canonical ordering by inputting Max Verstap-
5Note that rank collisions can occur when driver names share the
same first subtoken.
pen as first element has the result that the model does
not stick to a generation order anymore. Furthermore,
deviating from the canonical ordering leads to fewer
drivers being generated by the model.
Rank Developments of Missing Elements
In Figure
7, we show the relative rank development of three differ-
ent drivers that are missing from the final output when
inputting the first ever champion as start element. We
can see that they ranked at high relative spots, especially
in the early stages of the list generation process. How-
ever, they were never actually selected since they never
ranked top-1 at all. This shows that LLMs can actually
miss elements even though they played an actual role
during decoding. As a result, future research should fo-
cus on detecting missing elements from the logit scores
to improve recall.
We can conclude three major findings when compar-
ing the two runs. (1) Using the first champion as the
start element allows the LLM to generate subsequent
drivers mostly in order, as indicated by the diagonal
pattern. (2) In contrast, using the most recent champion
leads to generation of drivers out of order rather than
in reverse chronological order. (3) Sticking to the or-
der leads to more drivers being successfully generated,
while deviating from the canonical ordering, in this case
chronological, results in more omitted elements. This
aligns well with our previous findings that LLMs are
more reliable when generating following the canonical
ordering of the topic.
6
Conclusion & Outlook
We position our work as a starting point for further
research on multi-valued relation generation and rela-
tional knowledge extraction from LLMs as KBs. Our
mechanistic analysis suggests that multi-valued relation
generation in LLMs follows three phases: (1) “retrieval”
of relevant entities in the form of assigning higher prob-
abilities to tokens that are part of entities, (2) internal
sorting according to a relation-specific canonical order-
ing, and (3) selection of the next element during decod-
ing. Ultimately, our findings and illustration highlight a
general issue with the perception of LLMs: while they
encode a vast amount of useful knowledge, they do not
structure it in the way principled KBs are designed or in
the way humans reason about this knowledge. Instead,
our experiments clearly demonstrate that autoregressive
transformer architectures learn probability distributions
reflecting canonical orderings seen during pretraining
rather than actually incorporating the relationships in-
herent to multi-valued relations. To mitigate this issue,
we recommend incorporating shuffled and perturbed
variants of multi-valued relations during pre-training.
More broadly, our findings suggest that using LLMs as
knowledge bases requires accounting for their internal
ordering biases.


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910111213141516171819202122
Decoding Step
F1 Champion (Sorted by winning year)
Given as starting example
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
First list element given
(chronological order)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112131415
Decoding Step
Given as starting example
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
Last list element given
(reverse chronological order)
1
5
10
15
20
25
Rank (generated)
1
5
10
15
20
25
Rank (never generated)
Generated
Figure 6: Evolution of absolute ranks when generating the set of all distinct Formula 1 world champions given the
first (left, Giuseppe Farina) and most recent champion (right, Max Verstappen) as start element.
0
5
10
15
20
Entity Generation Step
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
Relative Rank
Relative Token Ordering (Distinct Formula 1 World Champions)
Selection Threshold
Jack Brabham
Mike Hawthorn
Denny Hulme
Figure 7: Relative rank development of three different
drivers that were not generated into the final output.
Limitations
A limitation of our work arises from the fact that we
rely on subtokens when identifying entities in the logit
space. These subtokens cannot always be unambigu-
ously mapped to their corresponding entities, especially
when multiple entities share the same initial syllables or
characters. To mitigate this issue, we primarily select
entities that are distinguishable in the subtoken space
for our mechanistic analyses. Nevertheless, some colli-
sions may still occur, in which case we cannot reliably
determine which entity the model would generate if it
continued generation from that subtoken.
Furthermore, in this work, we only deal with sets that
do not change too frequently. We leave the analysis of
frequently changing sets and the LLM behavior on them
for future work.
Ethical Considerations
In this work, we focus exclusively on publicly acces-
sible and well-known topics. We do not incorporate
any personally sensitive data that could be used to harm
individuals. Furthermore, we do not aim to elicit secret
or confidential knowledge that could be used in a harm-
ful way. Instead, our goal is to analyze how publicly
available knowledge can be elicited from LLMs.
References
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. 2020. Quantify-
ing attention flow in transformers. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 4190–4197, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ankush Agarwal, Chaitanya Devaguptapu, and Ganesh
S. 2025.
Hybrid graphs for table-and-text based
question answering using LLMs. In Proceedings
of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Amer-
icas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 858–875, Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Badr AlKhamissi, Millicent Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, Mona
Diab, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. 2022. A review
on language models as knowledge bases. Preprint,
arXiv:2204.06031.
Muhammad Arslan, Hussam Ghanem, Saba Munawar,
and Christophe Cruz. 2024. A survey on rag with
llms. Procedia computer science, 246:3781–3790.
Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Maximilian Kaufmann,
Mikita Balesni, Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Ko-
rbak, and Owain Evans. 2024. The reversal curse:
Llms trained on “a is b” fail to learn “b is a”. In


The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are
few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 1877–1901.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Xinyun Chen, Ryan Andrew Chi, Xuezhi Wang, and
Denny Zhou. 2024. Premise order matters in reason-
ing with large language models. In Proceedings of
the 41st International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 6596–6620. PMLR.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019. What does BERT
look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
pages 276–286, Florence, Italy. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Max Dreger, Kourosh Malek, and Michael Eikerling.
2025. Large language models for knowledge graph
extraction from tables in materials science. Digital
Discovery, 4(5):1221–1231.
Gemma-Team et al. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report.
Preprint, arXiv:2503.19786.
Aaron Grattafiori et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of mod-
els. Preprint, arXiv:2407.21783.
Yujia Hu, Shrestha Ghosh, Tuan-Phong Nguyen, and
Simon Razniewski. 2024.
Gptkb: Building very
large knowledge bases from language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.04920.
Jiahao Huo, Yibo Yan, Boren Hu, Yutao Yue, and Xum-
ing Hu. 2024. MMNeuron: Discovering neuron-level
domain-specific interpretation in multimodal large
language model. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 6801–6816, Miami, Florida, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention is
not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers), pages 3543–3556, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint,
arXiv:2310.06825.
YUE JIANG, Yile Chen, Xiucheng Li, Qin Chao,
SHUAI LIU, and Gao Cong. 2025. FSTLLM: Spatio-
temporal LLM for few shot time series forecasting.
In Forty-second International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham
Neubig. 2020. How can we know what language
models know? Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438.
Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, GE QU, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua
Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying
Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guo-
liang Li, Kevin Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng,
and Yongbin Li. 2023. Can LLM already serve as
a database interface? a BIg bench for large-scale
database grounded text-to-SQLs. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-
jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
Liang. 2024a. Lost in the middle: How language
models use long contexts. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173.
Tianyang Liu, Fei Wang, and Muhao Chen. 2024b. Re-
thinking tabular data understanding with large lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
450–482, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Zhiqiang Liu, Chengtao Gan, Junjie Wang, Yichi Zhang,
Zhongpu Bo, Mengshu Sun, Huajun Chen, and
Wen Zhang. 2025. Ontotune: Ontology-driven self-
training for aligning large language models.
In
Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025,
WWW ’25, page 119–133, New York, NY, USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel,
and Pontus Stenetorp. 2022. Fantastically ordered
prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-
shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.


Huu Tan Mai, Cuong Xuan Chu, and Heiko Paulheim.
2024. Do llms really adapt to domains? an ontology
learning perspective. In International Semantic Web
Conference, pages 126–143. Springer.
Lucas Moeller, Pascal Tilli, Thang Vu, and Sebastian
Padó. 2025. Explaining caption-image interactions in
CLIP models with second-order attributions. Trans-
actions on Machine Learning Research.
Haruki Nagasawa, Benjamin Heinzerling, Kazuma
Kokuta, and Kentaro Inui. 2023. Can LMs store and
retrieve 1-to-n relational knowledge? In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Re-
search Workshop), pages 130–138, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
OpenAI et al. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model
card. Preprint, arXiv:2508.10925.
Andrea Papaluca, Daniel Krefl, Sergio Rodríguez Mén-
dez, Artem Lensky, and Hanna Suominen. 2024.
Zero- and few-shots knowledge graph triplet ex-
traction with large language models. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Workshop on Knowledge Graphs and
Large Language Models (KaLLM 2024), pages 12–
23, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as knowl-
edge bases?
In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tomás Cerveira Da Cruz Pinto, Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira,
and Chris-Bennet Fleger. 2025. Exploring medium-
sized llms for knowledge base construction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Conference on Language, Data
and Knowledge, pages 221–232.
Nirmalendu Prakash and Roy Ka-Wei Lee. 2023. Lay-
ered bias: Interpreting bias in pretrained large lan-
guage models.
In Proceedings of the 6th Black-
boxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neu-
ral Networks for NLP, pages 284–295, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zongyue Qin, Chen Luo, Zhengyang Wang, Haom-
ing Jiang, and Yizhou Sun. 2024.
Relational
database augmented large language model. Preprint,
arXiv:2407.15071.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark,
Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learn-
ing transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. Preprint, arXiv:2103.00020.
John W Ratcliff, David E Metzener, et al. 1988. Pattern
matching: The gestalt approach. Dr. Dobb’s Journal,
13(7):46.
André Gomes Regino and Julio Cesar dos Reis. 2025.
Can LLMs be knowledge graph curators for validat-
ing triple insertions? In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Generative AI and Knowledge Graphs (GenAIK),
pages 87–99, Abu Dhabi, UAE. International Com-
mittee on Computational Linguistics.
Sneha Singhania, Simon Razniewski, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2023. Extracting multi-valued relations
from language models.
In Proceedings of the
8th Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP
(RepL4NLP 2023), pages 139–154, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: a core of semantic knowledge.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on World Wide Web, WWW ’07, page 697–706, New
York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017.
Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11
August 2017, Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 3319–3328. PMLR.
Denny Vrandeˇci´c and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wiki-
data: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Commun.
ACM, 57(10):78–85.
Rahman S. M. Wahidur, Sumin Kim, Haeung Choi,
David S. Bhatti, and Heung-No Lee. 2025. Legal
query rag. IEEE Access, 13:36978–36994.
Mingyang Wang, Heike Adel, Lukas Lange, Yihong Liu,
Ercong Nie, Jannik Strötgen, and Hinrich Schuetze.
2025.
Lost in multilinguality: Dissecting cross-
lingual factual inconsistency in transformer language
models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5075–5094, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhepei Wei, Jianlin Su, Yue Wang, Yuan Tian, and
Yi Chang. 2020. A novel cascade binary tagging
framework for relational triple extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1476–
1488, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Bowen Zhang and Harold Soh. 2024. Extract, define,
canonicalize: An llm-based framework for knowl-
edge graph construction. In Proceedings of the 2024
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 9820–9836.
Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein,
and Sameer Singh. 2021. Calibrate before use: Im-
proving few-shot performance of language models.
Preprint, arXiv:2102.09690.
Wei Zhou, Mohsen Mesgar, Annemarie Friedrich, and
Heike Adel. 2025a. Efficient multi-agent collabo-
ration with tool use for online planning in complex


table question answering. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025,
pages 945–968, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Yigeng Zhou, Wu Li, Yifan Lu, Jing Li, Fangming Liu,
Meishan Zhang, Yequan Wang, Daojing He, Honghai
Liu, and Min Zhang. 2025b. Reflection on knowl-
edge graph for large language models reasoning. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL 2025, pages 23840–23857, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiangrong Zhu, Yuexiang Xie, Yi Liu, Yaliang Li, and
Wei Hu. 2025. Knowledge graph-guided retrieval
augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2025
Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 8912–8924, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
