Title: From Document Silos to Process Intelligence: A Multi-Layer Knowledge Graph for CMC Process Development

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.11493v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 01:05:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# From Document Silos to Process Intelligence: A Dual-Layer Knowledge Graph for CMC Process Development 

Reza Amirmoshiri 1, Faryad Sahneh 2, and Yasser Jangjou 11CMC Synthetics, Sanofi US 

> 2

Accelerator Data science GBU, Sanofi US 

Correspondence: yasser.jangjou@sanofi.com 

Keywords: pharmaceutical manufacturing; knowledge graph; CMC process development; retrieval-augmented generation; ontology 

Abstract 

Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (CMC) process development generates an enormous body of technical information across a multi-stage, knowledge-intensive continuum extending from drug discovery to commercial manufacturing. This knowledge is traditionally fragmented across functions and heterogeneous formats, causing traceability gaps, siloed data storage, and significant knowledge-management costs during technology transfer and regulatory filing. We present a modular agentic-AI platform that converts a heterogeneous corpus of process-development documents into a queryable, dual-layer knowledge graph. A base knowledge layer builds a lexical graph with a Document → Section → Chunk hierarchy through lossless ingestion of digital, scanned, handwritten, and multilingual documents, while an intelligence layer extracts ontology-aligned entities and bridges cross-document and cross-project concepts through a provenance-anchored domain graph. LLM agents operate across both layers, selecting the retrieval path best suited to each question, from simple keyword lookups to complex corpus-wide anomaly detection. We evaluate the lexical layer with a novel three-tier protocol that measures the deployment-fidelity of a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) system on a corpus of proprietary programs, complementing existing competence benchmarks built on public data. The protocol is demon-strated on a bank of 505 questions, curated by a question-designer agent from 38 development reports of a Sanofi small-molecule program. The three tiers are Tier-1 multiple-choice accuracy, Tier-2 LLM-judge scoring of free-form answers, and Tier-3 subject-matter-expert review of the cases where the first two tiers disagree. A Tier-1 accuracy of 95% signals strong platform reliability. However, the stricter Tier-2 pass rate of 85%, which degrades on comparative and corpus-wide questions, reveals a failure taxonomy that Tier-1 accuracy alone fails to capture. We show, through a head-to-head assessment, that these limitations of the lexical layer are partly addressed by the ontology-guided intelligence layer, and we design a router agent that selects between the two layers according to question type, i.e., whole-corpus insight versus locally scoped fact. We anticipate that this benchmarking protocol will enable future designers of agentic platforms to assess their own systems against nonpublic databases, and that graph-based architectures will see broader adoption in the pharmaceutical industry as a means of preserving institutional knowledge and transforming fragmented document repositories into structured process intelligence. 

1arXiv:2609.11493v1 [cs.AI] 10 Sep 2026 1 Introduction 

Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls (CMC) serves as the critical bridge between molecular discovery and therapeutic realization, encompassing the operationally complex processes required to deliver a safe, effective and manufacturable medicine (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2003; International Council for Harmonisation, 2009, 2008; Mustoe et al., 2025). CMC development is a multi-stage, knowledge-intensive continuum extending from small-scale process scouting to robust, optimized, and scalable manufacturing for clinical and commercial supply. As illustrated in Figure 1, an enormous body of information accumulates during development while remaining fragmented across electronic laboratory notebooks (ELNs), technical reports, CMC dossiers, and batch records, in heterogeneous formats and languages. In this context, surveys report 10–15 years of development time and $1–2 billion in R&D costs for biopharmaceutical companies (DiMasi et al., 2016; Farid et al., 2020; Sertkaya and Berger, 2024; Destro and Barolo, 2022). Although ongoing digitalization in the biopharmaceutical sector aims to reduce the tangible costs of development, the hidden costs of knowledge management and transfer remain largely unaddressed. Data fragmentation, coupled with manual document reviews, makes technology transfer and dossier preparation slow and error-prone, while version proliferation and expert-dependent interpretation introduce traceability gaps, siloed storage, and the risk of outright knowledge loss. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems have been shown to address these challenges in biomedical fields, spanning document ingestion, information retrieval, and knowledge synthesis (Bonner et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2025; Gondi et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2022). Custom AI chatbots, built on a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) engine, have been commonly deployed to address user queries against an organization’s proprietary documents. RAG conditions a large language model (LLM) on passages retrieved from a document store rather than on its parameters alone, thus improving the LLM’s contextual awareness and addressing the limitation of the LLM’s context window (Lewis et al., 2020; Gondi et al., 2026; Taskiran et al., 2025). RAG is particularly attractive for biopharmaceutical companies, where data privacy is a crucial concern (Buehler, 2024; Wu et al., 2025; Gondi et al., 2026). One of the few applications reported within CMC development is SUSIE (Schema-based Unsupervised Semantic Information Extraction), a question-answering system for drug discovery and development grounded in a knowledge graph (Mann et al., 2023; Taskiran et al., 2025). Knowledge graphs (KGs) offer a fundamentally different representation from traditional data storage: knowledge is structured as a network of nodes (entities) connected by edges (relationships) carrying labels and properties. Rather than storing information in isolated tables or documents, a knowledge graph encodes entities and their relationships as an explicit, machine-readable, queryable network (Buehler, 2024). LLMs have recently made it practical to build KGs directly from unstructured technical text and to reason over them. This is achieved using GraphRAG, a RAG variant that augments flat-text retrieval with a graph so that the model reasons over explicit entities, relationships, and their neighborhoods rather than isolated chunks (Edge et al., 2024; Khorshidi et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2024). LLM reasoning is influenced by graph type and structure: a lexical graph represents documents, sections, and chunks as its nodes, whereas a domain graph represents real-world or digital-world entities according to a defined ontology. Ontologies covering CMC topics have been reported in the literature (Allotrope Foundation, 2024; Pistoia Alliance, 2024; Venkatasubramanian et al., 2006; Hailemariam and Venkatasubramanian, 2010; Viswanath et al., 2022; Remolona et al., 2017). CMC development is inherently relational: the most valuable insights often lie not within a single information chunk but in the connections among data points across experiments, scales, sites, and time. This makes GraphRAG attractive for turning isolated data slices into a coherent, queryable whole. However, graph construction is costly and delicate and requires careful consideration of the 2ELN pages Compound data Patents Literature Solvent screens Impurity ID Risk assessments DoE studies CRO/CDMO reports Demo runs IQ/OQ Failure investigations Dossier sections Specifications Stability Batch records Change controls SPC charts Deviation reports Digital twin  

> Route Scouting Process Development Scale-up & tech transfer Registration & validation Commercial supply

# aa aaaAccumulated process knowledge Route C Route A Route D Route B  

> Dropped—Impurity limit exceeded Dropped—process not scalable Dropped—purification insufficient Dropped—safety & regulatory risk
> Route E Commercial manufacturing route

Figure 1: Knowledge accumulation and route convergence across a typical CMC process development timeline. Each phase draws on its own characteristic sources, named beneath it, and each node represents an information source. The most valuable insight lies not in a single record but in the relationships between them which span phases, scales, sites, and years. A platform based on knowledge graph transforms fragmented data into actionable knowledge. endpoint application before construction begins. Question-answering based on keyword and semantic search can largely be addressed by a robust vector-RAG system coupled with a lexical graph—a precision layer. A CMC example is a process scientist searching for precise experimental conditions across hundreds of documents; the current wave of “chat-with-your-documents” demonstrations fits this category. However, corpus-wide anomaly detection (for instance, investigating the source and fate of an impurity) instead requires cross-document and cross-project retrieval over an ontological graph. To the authors’ knowledge, no application within CMC development has addressed this endpoint variety with a modular architecture. Direct ingestion of source documents into a domain graph can miss the keyword-oriented questions that a process scientist most commonly asks. A second challenge is the quality of the domain graph, which depends on entity resolution, an essential concern in fields like process chemistry. For instance, acetonitrile, MeCN, ACN and CH 3CN all denote one canonical entity, although they might be written differently across technical reports; careful entity resolution must therefore precede domain graph construction. The third challenge is the absence of rigorous benchmarking specific to process development, as a persuasive chat transcript is not evidence of reliability. An end-to-end pipeline can fail at any stage of graph construction, knowledge retrieval, or inference. The architectural idea of separating instance-level facts from domain-level concepts in a dual-layer graph has recently been demonstrated outside the pharmaceutical industry, in reservoir engineering 3(Li et al., 2025), and the need for a CMC knowledge infrastructure grounded in an ontology has been argued at the policy level (Hussain et al., 2026). Our contribution is to realize this architecture within the context of CMC process development and, critically, to subject it to quantitative evaluation at a scale that reveals where it fails. The current paper addresses the existing gaps with the following contributions: • An end-to-end modular pipeline for CMC process development that converts heterogeneous document sources into structured graph representations and answers questions through com-plementary LLM agents selected by question type. The graph architecture is dual-layer, combining lossless lexical ingestion of heterogeneous CMC documents (digital, scanned, hand-written, and multilingual) with an ontology-guided intelligence layer that bridges disconnected per-document graphs into a single cross-document, cross-project institutional graph. The pipeline also integrates document translation and scanned-document digitization, saving time and cost. We first quantify whether hybrid retrieval based on lexical graphs alone (without an applied ontology) can address a variety of questions asked by a CMC expert. We then illuminate the additional value of an ontology-driven domain graph anchored to the base lexical graph. • A three-tier benchmarking protocol and a question-design methodology that quantify reliability across increasing reasoning complexity, together with a failure taxonomy that pinpoints where and why retrieval breaks down. We emphasize the criticality of comprehensive benchmarking, which is largely unreported in previous work, not only within CMC but as part of the RAG platforms introduced in other fields. While competence benchmarks, such as ChemRAG-Bench (Zhong et al., 2025), evaluate whether a system knows the context (chemistry, in that case), our protocol measures deployment fidelity, i.e., whether the system reliably retrieves and reasons over a specific institution’s private documents/database. We believe that the benchmarking protocol introduced in this paper is applicable to future retrieval systems in various domains. • A direct analysis of lexical versus domain graphs with respect to the type of question, based on a sample of questions. We show that a hybrid system benefiting from both layers addresses a wider spectrum of questions than either alone; and that a router agent, which selects retrieval paths, improves both accuracy and traceability. This is made possible by making the domain graph provenance-anchored to the lexical evidence: every canonical entity and relation resolves back to the exact source passages that justify it (Section 2.3). Although the platform has been examined across multiple internal Sanofi CMC Synthetics projects, this paper reports graph details and assessments for a single discontinued Sanofi small-molecule program. The paper proceeds as follows. First, we describe the platform architecture and its hybrid retrieval, together with the agentic workflow from document ingestion through graph construction to agent reasoning, followed by the evaluation approach and question design. Second, we report the dual-layer graph composition, followed by examining the lexical graph reliability and limits under three-tier benchmarking. Third, we demonstrate how anchoring a domain graph to the existing lexical layer, together with a router agent that selects the retrieval path according to the type of question, can address the limitations of the lexical graph. Finally, we discuss the key conclusions and outlook for future work. 

# 2 Platform Architecture and Methods 

A dual-layer modular architecture is designed to address a range of queries, from keyword-oriented questions posed by an expert to process-design decisions made by a project lead. Figure 2 summarizes 4the guiding vision, in which an end-to-end pipeline converts raw documents into an intelligence layer via an intermediate knowledge layer. At the bottom, a data layer comprises raw, heterogeneous documents and data files from various sources, scattered across databases with no connection among them. Most biopharmaceutical organizations currently operate at this stage, where an LLM-based in-house assistant provides document summaries and answers predominantly keyword-oriented questions. Lossless ingestion of these raw files produces an organized and machine-readable lexical graph (also called a knowledge layer), in which each file exists as an independent node, expandable to its sections and chunks (text, tables, and figures) with hierarchy preserved. This intermediate knowledge layer prevents knowledge loss while enabling AI-assisted question answering and retrieval. The intelligence layer, built on top of the lexical graph, is an ontology-driven graph. It contains the real-world concepts of a specific domain, in this case process chemistry, extracted from the chunks of the knowledge layer according to an applied class vocabulary. We refer to this level as the 

intelligence layer , to the graph it holds as the domain graph, and to the agent that operates on it as the domain agent. The intelligence layer entities, while anchored to their source chunks, form a global graph that unifies domain-specific contents not only across documents within one project, but also across multiple projects. It is from the intelligence layer that patterns embedded in the connections between documents are revealed from a bird’s-eye view, turning data into intelligence and ultimately decisions. The following sections describe the construction of each layer. KNOWLEDGE LAYER 

> (lexical graph)

DATA LAYER 

> (source documents)

INTELLIGENCE LAYER  

> (domain graph)
> Chemical substance Process A Process C
> HAS_INPUT PRECEDS
> HAS_ PARTICIPANT
> Unit Operation
> HAS_ROLE
> Reactor Document
> HAS_CHUNK
> Section Chunk + embedding
> HAS_SECTION HAS_NEXT / HAS_PREV (reading order) HAS_CHUNK
> Section
> Lexical islands, one per document no edges between them
> Technical reports Batch records ELN pages Slide decks CoAs & specs Scanned / Handwritten notes
> Lossless ingestion (Docling + OCR) Entity extraction + global resolution HAS_MENTION Anchoring entities to source chunks
> Resolved canonical entities (cross-document & cross-project)

Figure 2: The multi-layer architecture: the data layer holds raw documents in heterogeneous formats, disconnected and without shared structure. Lossless ingestion of the documents produces the knowledge layer (lexical graph), in which every document becomes its own Document →

Section → Chunk tree joined by HAS_SECTION and HAS_CHUNK edges, with HAS_NEXT preserving reading; the knowledge layer is well suited to keyword and passage questions but carries no edges between documents. Entity extraction, based on a domain ontology, and global resolution produce the intelligence layer (domain graph), whose canonical entities are anchored to the chunks that mention them by HAS_MENTION edges. The intelligence layer merges lexical islands across documents and projects into one queryable graph. 52.1 Corpus and document heterogeneity 

Although the platform has been tested internally on multiple CMC programs, each with 300+ technical documents, here we report quantitative results on a smaller testbed drawn from a discontinued Sanofi small-molecule program (the RIPK1 inhibitor oditrasertib; Leszczak et al., 2018). The testbed comprises 38 documents: 31 .docx snapshots representing dated checkpoints of two living technical reports (21 checkpoints of one report and 10 of the other), one standalone 

.docx appendix on solvent properties, and six .pdf slide decks and appendices. Together, they contain more than 600 pages and roughly 52,000 words of technical content. The 31 snapshots cover 1-2 years of development efforts, with the two main reports growing from approximately 2,000 to 26,000 words (10–31 pages) and from 2,100 to 25,500 words (1–108 pages), respectively. The reports discuss process development, analytical measurement, and stability data in six sequential steps of chemical synthesis. This emphasis on document lineages, rather than independent files, is by design. Version proliferation is one of the specific failure modes that this work targets: while a simple RAG system can support a user looking up keywords and specific details from an independent document, a process expert usually looks for information across a lineage of revisions, where conditions, batch identifiers, and conclusions shift between checkpoints, and the question that matters is often what changed and when. A corpus of independent documents would test a strictly easier problem than the one practitioners actually face. The testbed also contains genuinely independent material (six slide decks and appendices plus a standalone solvent-property document) covering both within-lineage and across-document cases. Although the testbed discussed in this paper consists of documents in English, the platform is built to handle messy corpora, i.e., a mixture of digital and handwritten document scans in multiple languages (German, French, and Chinese), much of which is not machine-readable as received. This heterogeneity, typical of a technology transfer, is exactly what a practical ingestion pipeline must absorb. 

2.2 Knowledge layer: lexical graph 

Documents are parsed with Docling (Livathinos et al., 2025; Auer et al., 2024), which recovers layout, tables, and reading order, and can normalize scanned content with optical character recognition (OCR) — with optional translation to English for non-English source documents. Docling ingests PDF, DOCX, PPTX, XLSX, HTML, Markdown, AsciiDoc, CSV, and image inputs natively, so a single pipeline absorbs the full range of source formats with no pre-conversion step. Each document is written in a Neo4j property graph (Scifo, 2023) as a Document –[HAS_SECTION] → Section –[HAS_ CHUNK] → Chunk hierarchy, where sections nest to reflect the document’s heading structure, and HAS_NEXT edges link consecutive chunks within each section to preserve reading order (see the lexical graph in Figure 2). Chunks are element-aligned rather than produced by a fixed-width sliding window: each Docling element becomes one chunk, so no overlap parameter is required and no element is split across chunk boundaries. Oversized tables are the exception and are sub-chunked by row windows. Every chunk carries its text or table payload; chunks with at least 25 characters of extractable text also carry a 1024-dimensional dense embedding (Amazon Titan Text Embeddings V2), stored on the node alongside the graph. Sub-threshold fragments and figure payloads are retained verbatim but not embedded, since they carry no retrievable prose. Retrieval combines the search for exact and full-text terms (Lucene BM25 over a full-text index of raw and normalized text) with vector similarity (approximate nearest neighbor over a cosine vector index). The result is a modular end-to-end 6pipeline that ingests an entire multilingual, mixed-modality corpus and makes it queryable. Within the lexical layer, each document is a self-contained Document → Section → Chunk tree. These trees form lexical islands : excellent for locating information inside one document, but disconnected from one another. 

2.3 Intelligence layer: domain graph 

The domain (ontological) graph is constructed from the same extraction JSON files produced during lexical ingestion, so it does not add a new parsing burden. For each chunk, an LLM proposes ontological entities (each with a name, type, description, aliases, and declared process inputs and outputs) typed against a class vocabulary of chemical substance, planned process, unit operation, equipment, and role. This vocabulary is aligned with OPC/PROCO and the material/process distinction of the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) (He and Schafer, 2020; Allotrope Foundation, 2024; Arp et al., 2015), and is expressed as a prompt-level schema together with a type-to-BFO-category map. We note explicitly that no OWL artifact is loaded and no description-logic reasoner or SPARQL engine is used here; the ontology functions here as a controlled vocabulary and a consistency constraint, rather than as an inference engine. The domain graph pipeline (i) generates entities (chemical_substance, planned_process, unit_operation, equipment, role) and edges (PRECEDES, HAS_SPECIFIED_INPUT, HAS_SPECIFIED_OUTPUT, HAS_ROLE, HAS_PARTICIPANT, PART_OF, IS_A, HAS_FUNCTION) and stores them as node–edge–node triples; (ii) performs global entity resolution to create a canonical entity registry, so that the many surface forms of a chemical substance collapse to one node (for instance: MeCN, ACN, and acetonitrile); and (iii) assembles the domain graph, anchored back to the lexical layer through HAS_MENTION edges linking each canonical entity to every chunk that mentions it. This anchoring keeps domain graph answers verifiable, such that an entity or relation reached by a HAS_MENTION edge can be traced to the exact source passages supporting it, rather than only to a corpus-level summary of where such evidence might be. We refer to this design principle as provenance anchoring , and note that not every entity in the registry includes a HAS_MENTION anchoring edge. For instance, an LLM may assign a synthesized process label (e.g., S3_reaction )that never appears verbatim in any chunk; the entity can also be auto-promoted from a cross-document input/output (I/O) reference and therefore never encounters raw text; or the entity is mentioned only under an abbreviation that was not recorded as an alias. Note that the entities without HAS_MENTION edges are still reachable by traversing one relation-hop from a directly anchored neighbor in the domain graph, yielding 98.9% effective provenance coverage in this case (98.9% of entities are either directly anchored or one hop from a directly anchored entity). This structure (direct anchor and one-hop reachable) enables corpus-wide answers to be checked and helps the router agent move a question between the domain graph and lexical graph without losing the ability to verify either answer against text. For a regulated, auditable environment, such as GxP process development, dossier preparation, or deviation investigation, this property is consequential. In particular, a wrong answer that is traceable can be caught and corrected, while a wrong answer with no path back to source text cannot be distinguished from a right one without re-doing the underlying research. Entity resolution proceeds by union-find over document-local mentions, blocked by entity type. Merges come from three sources in order of precedence: exact name and alias matching; expansion through a curated process-chemistry synonym table covering solvents, reagents, catalysts, and equipment; and, as a conservative backstop, cosine similarity above 0.92 between entity vectors formed by mean-pooling the embeddings of the chunks in which each entity appears. Guards block 7chemically invalid merges. No LLM adjudication is used at this stage, so resolution is reproducible given fixed extraction output. A subsequent consistency pass checks that all members of a cluster agree on their BFO category, splitting the cluster where they do not. The surviving category is carried forward onto the canonical entity and written to the graph, so every entity is queryable by BFO category as well as by OPC/PROCO class. 

2.4 Reasoning: agentic workflow 

The reasoning incorporates three LLM agents. Two are implemented with the DSPy ReAct paradigm of interleaved reasoning and acting (Khattab et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023) and query a Neo4j graph database. The Lexical_ReAct agent operates on the lexical graph and is assigned a budget of twelve reasoning iterations and eight retrieval tools, covering multiple retrieval dimensions of meaning, keywords, scope, and navigation within the Document → Section → Chunk graph, all issued as Cypher queries against Neo4j. Lexical_ReAct excels at precise, single- or few-document questions, including exact keyword and full-text lookup. It is confined to chunk and document nodes with no path to canonical entities. The Domain_ReAct agent traverses the canonical entity graph and excels at aggregation, exclusivity, overlap, and connectivity questions that span the corpus. It is equipped with a single tool, which reads the question and dispatches it to one of the parametrized Cypher templates over the edges that carry process-chemistry semantics. The agent selects among templates rather than freely authoring Cypher from scratch. Each template encodes the correct edge direction and parameter binding for its respective query type, which prevents the class of errors that arise when an LLM constructs graph traversals ad hoc. The third agent is a router, which selects between the Lexical_ and Domain_ReAct agents, according to the input question. It can also dispatch both agents, when a question needs resolved structure and passage detail together. Routing is deliberately two-stage and cheapest-first. The first stage involves a set of high-precision deterministic rules (LLM-free) to resolve the unambiguous cases. For instance, a question requesting a quantity or lot number is passage-level and goes to the lexical agent, whereas one asking what is unique to, shared between, or aggregated across documents goes to the domain agent. If none of the rules fires, the router makes a single tool-free LLM call to classify the question. Because the domain graph is provenance-anchored, a domain graph answer can usually drop down to the underlying chunks to ground or expand itself. All agents are built with DSPy ( dspy-ai ≥ 2.5), run on AWS Bedrock with Anthropic Claude Sonnet 4.5 at a decoding temperature of 0.2 and a 2,048-token generation limit, and query a Neo4j graph database (Neo4j Desktop 2026.05, Python driver 5.x). 

2.5 Benchmarking 

The benchmarking approach in this paper is designed to address the key gaps in reporting QA evaluation for RAG systems, and to introduce a deployment-fidelity benchmark that complements existing competence benchmarks. First, when the corpus involves proprietary programs, crucial questions must target the internal process history that no pretrained model could have memorized. This is inherently uncaptured in public-corpus benchmarks, where a model may answer a question correctly not just through improved passage retrieval, but also from its parametric memory (memo-rization confound). A recently reported benchmark for public settings is ChemRAG-Bench (Zhong et al., 2025), where the RAG system outperforms direct inference by an average of 17.4% on 1,932 questions assembled from four public datasets (larger models gained comparatively little improve-ment, consistent with memorization of those public sources). Here, we introduce a comprehensive 8benchmark tailored to settings with a proprietary corpus. Second, the benchmarking approach should account for all critical steps of an end-to-end knowledge graph pipeline, which includes graph construction, retrieval, and inference jointly. In this context, the information extraction from CMC documents is evaluated against annotated ground truth and reported in (Mann et al., 2023). However, extraction quality does not guarantee reliability at the retrieval and inference stages. Our benchmarking approach converts an aggregate accuracy figure into a map of where the system can and cannot be trusted, thereby illuminating a failure taxonomy. Third, the quality and design of the question bank can significantly influence the reported QA score. We ensure that the questions probe corpus-specific knowledge that an SME would actually ask by generating questions from the corpus extraction JSON itself via an agentic AI workflow. The following subsections describe the workflow for question design and the three-tier assessment of the lexical graph layer. The first step is to design questions that resemble those asked by an expert in the domain. We built a question-designer agent that reads the per-document extraction JSON and produces multiple-choice questions (MCQs) in a fixed schema: a stem, four options (one correct), the correct letter, an explanation, an evidence quote, the evidence location and source document, and a question-type label (procedure, results, comprehension, process conditions, analytical method, and others). The questions are generated in four cohorts according to anchoring mode and difficulty. An 

anchored question names a reference point (“In report X, what was the value of . . . ?”), whereas an 

unanchored question references no document or section (“What method is recommended for. . . ?”). 

Hard questions are longer, must combine at least two evidence spans, or paraphrase rather than quote, and use distractor options that share vocabulary with the correct option. Comparative 

questions are generated over document pairs (“How did process X change from Doc-A to Doc-B?”) with both documents in context and both filenames mentioned in the stem. The four cohorts are: easy-mixed (a mixture of anchored and unanchored), hard-anchored, hard-unanchored, and comparative. One quiz file is generated per document, with the question count scaled by document length as round(10 × w/ 8000) for a document of w words, bound between 5 and 30. A mirror-overlap filter controls distractor difficulty. The quiz files from each document are concatenated, shuffled, and undergo cross-document deduplication (rejecting questions whose content-word overlap exceeded 0.65, plus exact evidence-quote duplicates). Twenty percent of the questions are randomly reviewed by an SME for correctness and quality before any evaluation is run; in the end, 100 questions are preserved for an initial pilot and 505 are selected for the final evaluation run. Refer to Appendix A for examples of each cohort. Following question design, a three-tier evaluation of increasing stringency is implemented. Tier 1 (T1, MCQ accuracy) compares the answering agent’s selected letter (out of four options) against the gold answer. T1 is binary, cheap, and reproducible, making it suitable for rapid regression testing. In Tier 2 (T2), the same questions are asked without exposing the four options to the answering agent. Next, an LLM judge scores the answering agent’s free-form justification on a 0–5 rubric for factual correctness, alongside the cosine similarity (embed_sim) between the agent’s answer and the reference explanation. T2 is more costly than T1, but eliminates the guessing floor of T1. Note that the judge model defaults to the same model and provider as the answering agent, Claude Sonnet 4.5 on Bedrock. The authors have not evaluated whether this shared lineage biases the judge toward the agent’s own phrasing (a documented risk in LLM-as-judge setups). The Tier-3 layer involves a human SME familiar with the corpus, who reviews items where the T1-pass (correct letter selected) and the T2-pass (judge_score >= 4) disagree. For these items, the SME assigns a failure mode and may override a judge score. For instance, T2 exposes “misleading positives”, in which the right letter is selected in T1 but the underlying reasoning is wrong or insufficient. Furthermore, we report two contingency tables, one for T1 × T2 with Cohen’s Kappa, and one for judge_score × embed_sim. 9The Tier 3 review follows a stratified sampling design rather than exhaustively hand-coding every disagreement: every item where Tier 1 and Tier 2 disagree is reviewed in full; a stratified sample of items that fail both tiers is reviewed for attribution; and a thin spot-check of items that pass both tiers screens for a mis-keyed gold answer (Section 3.3). We report T1 accuracy and T2 pass rate with Wilson 95% confidence intervals. 

# 3 Results and Discussion 

3.1 Graph composition 

A dual-layer graph with 12,353 nodes and 45,471 edges is constructed from the complete processing of the testbed described in Section 2.1. Figure 3 shows a portion of the graph visualized in Neo4j. The lexical graph comprises 38 Document nodes, 1,452 Section nodes joined by HAS_SECTION edges, and 10,326 Chunk nodes joined by HAS_CHUNK edges, with 9,178 HAS_NEXT edges that preserve reading order. Of the chunk nodes, 1,925 are additionally labeled Table and 800 Figure, so that tabular and graphical payloads remain first-class retrievable objects rather than being flattened into prose; 93.2% of chunks (9,620 of 10,326) carry a dense embedding, while the remainder consists of sub-threshold text fragments and figure payloads with no retrievable prose. The domain graph contributes 537 canonical entities: chemical substance (252), planned process (153), unit operation (91), equipment (30) and role (11). The entities are anchored to the lexical layer through 22,688 HAS_MENTION edges: 22,017 to individual chunks and 671 to whole sections. Of the 537 entities, 315 (59%) carry at least one direct HAS_MENTION edge to their respective chunks. The remaining 222 (41%) entities, as described in Section 2.3, are one relation-hop from a directly-anchored entity. These include: role-category entities (e.g. "catalyst", "solvent", "reagent", etc.) that are constructed as functional abstractions across many mentions; and per-step labels that the extraction agent inferred from surrounding context rather than from being named at one citable location. The relationships within the domain graph comprise HAS_SPECIFIED_INPUT (960), HAS_ROLE (293), HAS_SPECIFIED_OUTPUT (264), PRECEDES (244), HAS_PARTICIPANT (55), and PART_OF (9), for 1,825 domain graph relations in total. The lexical graph therefore contributes roughly 22 times as many nodes as the domain graph, which is precisely the point of the dual-layer architecture. The lexical graph preserves every piece of information for keyword matching, precise term lookup, and semantic search, while the domain graph distills the corpus into a navigable structure tailored to the domain expert (in this example, a process chemist). It is through this explicit, easily navigable domain graph that corpus-wide patterns are revealed. Note that the 22x ratio is a property of the entire corpus and is not reproduced in the Figure 3 subgraph. The ratio for this 5-document slice is smaller (138 canonical entities anchored to five document chunks, versus 1,756 lexical nodes in the same slice). Canonical entities are corpus-global, so all 537 are potentially reachable from any subset of documents, whereas the lexical nodes belonging to five documents are exclusive to those five documents. A small slice can therefore over-represent the domain layer, and the ratio approaches the corpus-wide figure only as the document set approaches the full corpus. The global entity resolution on this corpus collapses 3,236 document-local mentions into 537 canonical entities. Of the total of 2,699 merges, 2,396 (88.8%) are achieved through exact name, alias, or curated-synonym matching; 248 (9.2%) through promotion of process-chemistry roles into entities with shared roles; and only 55 (2.0%) through embedding similarity. This indicates a highly deterministic resolution, with the embedding step acting as a conservative backstop rather than the primary mechanism. Of the 537 canonical entities, 238 are singletons that appear in a single document and were never merged. No LLM adjudication is employed at this stage, which ensures 10 that the resolution is reproducible given a fixed extraction output. A subsequent consistency pass in the pipeline checks that all members of a cluster agree on their BFO category, splitting the cluster where they do not; on this corpus, it examined 299 clusters (537 entities minus 238 singletons) and split none. The surviving category is carried forward onto the canonical entity and written to the graph, so that all 537 entities are queryable by BFO category as well as by process-chemistry class. 

3.2 Graph reproducibility 

The construction of lexical graphs for the corpus studied here is deterministic, since Docling parsing, chunk creation, and Titan embedding do not involve an LLM call. However, entity extraction for domain graph construction can introduce nondeterminism. While comprehensive reproducibility testing is beyond the scope of this paper, the following observations are reported: repeating entity extraction from the chunks of one document, at the default temperature of 0.2, yielded 94 and 91 entities, respectively; repeating the experiment with the temperature pinned to zero and Python’s hash randomization disabled yielded 83 and 86, respectively. We note that, in our analysis, the decoding temperature was the only available generation-time control parameter, and the sampling seed for the model was not exposed by Bedrock. Although two runs per condition are insufficient to isolate a true temperature effect from run-to-run noise, repeated runs within each condition still produced differing entity counts, descriptions, and chunk anchors, demonstrating that pinning temperature alone did not render extraction reproducible. We hypothesize that the residual variation reflects non-determinism in the inference service itself, which temperature does not control, and that this is plausibly amplified by the windowed multi-call structure of our extraction agent, where an early divergence could alter the near-duplicate consolidation that follows. Everything downstream of entity extraction, namely, global entity resolution, BFO validation, edge remapping, canonical-ontology construction, retrieval, and scoring, does not contain an LLM call and is reproducible given fixed extraction output. For regulated use, this is the gap that must be closed, requiring either a seeded inference endpoint or an extraction pass that is verified against the source text rather than simply trusted. In the following section, the three-tier benchmarking approach is applied to the lexical graph and its ReAct agent; the limitations are then highlighted through a failure taxonomy. We subsequently discuss how the domain graph can complement the identified limitations. 

3.3 Lexical agent: reliability and limits 

A preliminary assessment of the Lexical_ReAct based on 100 questions (designed in easy mode with mixed anchoring) revealed failure patterns in both retrieval and reasoning that guided agent prompt refinement. The final evaluation was run on a separate set of 505 questions that span the four cohorts of easy-mixed (86), hard-anchored (164), hard-unanchored (187), and comparative (68). The Lexical_ReAct results from T1 MCQ accuracy and T2 pass rate (judge_score >=4) are shown in (Figure 4a) with green and purple bars, respectively. T1 accuracy is 95.0% (480/505, Wilson 95% CI 92.8–96.6) and T2 pass rate is 84.7% (428/505, CI 81.4–87.6). The Lexical_ReAct accuracy is assessed by comparing its scores with those from a baseline vector-RAG (88.5% at T1 and 65.5% on T2 pass rate) on the same 505-question bank. The Lexical_ReAct outperforms the baseline RAG by 6.5% on T1 and 19.2% on T2. The improvement is explained by two mechanisms: first, the Lexical_ReAct has access to the neighboring chunks via the lexical graph and a graph traversal tool to exploit it; second, the Lexical_ReAct employs an iterative reasoning and acting loop as part of the ReAct paradigm, while the baseline RAG is loop-free. Note that the other variables, including the embedding model, chunk corpus, hybrid retrieval index, LLM prompt, answer parser, 11 Edges HAS_CHUNK (1,567) HAS_MENTION (3,504) HAS_SECTION (184) 

> Nodes in this subgraph
> Document (5) Section (184) Chunk (1,189) Table (265) Figure (113) Canonical entity (138)

Figure 3: A portion of the dual-layer graph: the five documents whose chunk count is closest to the corpus median, with their sections and chunks and the 138 canonical entities anchored to them. Document, Section and Chunk nodes (including the Table and Figure sub-labels) constitute the lexical layer; canonical entities from the domain graph attach to their source chunks by HAS_MENTION edges, which is what bridges the per-document trees. and LLM judge are kept constant. Figure 4a also shows lower accuracy with the stricter Tier-2 assessment compared to Tier-1, in both the baseline RAG and Lexical_ReAct. This highlights the recognition–generation gap with the answering agent. In Tier-1, the agent can pick the correct option out of four, with a 25% guess floor and elimination available even without full understanding ( recognition ). However, in Tier-2, the agent must state the answer in prose against the gold explanation without a guess floor ( generation ). The recognition–generation gap is notably smaller in the Lexical_ReAct case compared to the baseline vector-RAG. These results emphasize how the final benchmarking scores are influenced by the type of QA approach employed (MCQ vs freeform judgment). The other factors that affect the final scores are the question type and quality. An informative pattern is revealed by the cohort breakdown in Figure 4b: T1 MCQ accuracy scores are high and relatively stable across all four cohorts. However, T2 metric scores fall more significantly across the unanchored and comparative cohorts, which include the type of questions that require synthesizing evidence spread across multiple documents, i.e., a retrieval challenge for the answering agent. The score drop from T1 to T2 across the comparative cohort was even sharper for the baseline RAG (94% to 19%). Table 1 lists the contingency of Tier-1 × Tier-2 for each cohort, illuminating the raw agreement (pass/pass and fail/fail cases) and the disagreement cases (T1-only and T2-only). Cohen’s kappa is also quantified for each row to reflect the chance floor when both tiers mostly pass (0.17–0.32 reflecting low-to-moderate). Once the agreement expected from each tier’s own marginal 12 Vector-RAG Baseline Lexical_ReAct 

a bc    

> Tier-1 MCQ accuracy Tier-2 pass rate (judge_score ≥4)
> Free-form abstain 1% (n=1) Reasoning failure 3% (n=2) LLM judge/scoring error 5% (n=4) MCQ Letter-parse error 11% (n=8) Extraction error 36% (n=27) Ambiguous questions 43% (n=32) SME-reviewed divergencies
> Tier-1 MCQ accuracy Tier-2 pass rate (judge_score ≥4)

Figure 4: (a) Tier-1 multiple-choice accuracy (green) and Tier-2 pass rate (purple), defined as a correct T1 letter, and Tier-2 judge score ≥ 4, respectively, for the vector-RAG baseline and the Lexical_ReAct based on 505-question curated bank. Error bars are Wilson 95% confidence intervals. (b) T1 and T2 scores broken down by the four question cohorts. (c) Failure taxonomy over the 74 Tier-1/Tier-2 divergent items sent to Tier-3 SME review under a stratified sampling design (Table 1) pass rate is subtracted out, Tier 1 and Tier 2 are shown to be measuring related but distinguishable capabilities rather than one being largely redundant with the other. Table 1: Tier-1 × Tier-2 contingency, per cohort and pooled. T2 pass uses judge_score ≥ 4 rule (a materially complete and correct free-from answer); Cohen’s kappa between T1 correctness and this stricter T2 pass 

Cohort n T1 T2 pass/pass T1-only T2-only fail/fail κ

Easy-mixed 86 95.3% 91.9% 77 5 2 2 0.32 Hard-anchored 164 98.2% 93.3% 152 9 1 2 0.26 Hard-unanchored 187 92.5% 79.1% 141 32 7 7 0.17 Comparative 68 94.1% 70.6% 47 17 1 3 0.17 Combined 505 95.0% 84.7% 417 63 11 14 0.22 

It is worth noting that Tier-2 score quality depends not just on the performance of the Lexi-cal_ReAct, but also on the accuracy of the LLM judge. To ensure judge accuracy, the embedding similarity (cosine similarity between the free-form answer and the gold explanation) is also captured as part of the assessment. We note that the LLM judge_score and embedding similarity are imperfect proxies for one another; this is shown by cross-tabulating judge score against embedding similarity, split at each cohort’s median similarity (Appendix A). The paraphrase trap quadrant—high embed-ding similarity but low judge score—captures correct-sounding answers that are factually wrong, a failure mode that similarity metrics alone cannot detect. Across all 505 scored answers, 22 instances fall in this quadrant, concentrated on hard-unanchored and comparative questions where reasoning must synthesize evidence across documents. Judge score and embedding similarity correlate only moderately (Spearman ρ=0.30, p<0.001), underscoring that surface similarity to the gold standard 13 is not a substitute for semantic correctness. A full contingency table is provided in the appendix. The disagreement cases between the first two tiers comprise 74 of the 505 questions (63 T1-only and 11 T2-only) . These questions plus a 30%-stratified sample of items that fail both tiers are reviewed by an SME in Tier-3. The failure taxonomy is revealed in Figure 4c. Question-quality issues are the largest category (43%, n=32). These items were judged by the SME as either ambiguous, internally inconsistent, or resting on a table or entry number that disagrees with its own gold explanation. These were followed by extraction errors (36%, n=27), letter-parsing errors 

(11%, n=8), judge scoring errors (5%, n=4), reasoning failures (3%, n=2), and a single residual 

free-form abstention (1%, n=1). Most of the disagreement between the two tiers is attributable to the questions themselves, not to the agent’s retrieval or reasoning. This limitation can be addressed by further improving the question-designer LLM agent. Letter-parsing errors refer to cases where the freeform answer in Tier-2 was accurate, while a wrong letter was picked in Tier-1. We believe this is caused by excessive similarity between two options and could be reduced by refining the questions (an artifact of the MCQ format rather than of retrieval). The dominance of extraction errors, compared to reasoning failures, is also an encouraging sign for future improvements to the platform. A closer look reveals that the extraction errors are concentrated on hard-unanchored questions (45% of the reviewed divergences) for which the answering agent has few clues to find the evidence location(s). This can become significant with a corpus size much larger than the one studied here. From a practical perspective, comparing Tier-1 and Tier-2 reveals two important considerations for reporting QA-based benchmarks: first, depending on the question type and quality, reporting only Tier-1 MCQ accuracy can overestimate a pipeline’s reliability. This might not be an issue when the benchmarking is primarily based on easy questions (such as keyword-oriented ones or those hinting at a specific document/section/chunk); yet, assessments based on longer questions, with their evidence scattered across multiple locations, can result in divergence between Tier-1 and Tier-2. The Tier-1 approach is the better metric for comparing platforms head-to-head, because it is reproducible and cheap; whereas Tier-2 can reveal the recognition–generation gap and is a better instrument for locating failure mechanisms within one platform. We emphasize the importance of Tier-2 especially for regulatory applications such as those encountered in the pharmaceutical industry. 

3.4 Domain agent as the complement 

Systematic benchmarking of the knowledge layer (lexical) in Section 3.3 illuminates the question patterns where the answering agent is likely to fail. In fact, the failure is expected to grow when the comparison spans not a pair but many documents, or an entire project corpus of 300+ documents. In the context of CMC synthetics, a process expert is often interested in the evolution of a substance, process, or impurity across a multi-step synthetic route or in the commonality of specific materials or methods across steps or even projects. Answering such queries—even with multi-hop traversal—is extremely challenging for the lexical ReAct agent. As reported in Section 3.1, the lexical layer for a corpus of 38 documents holds 11,816 nodes. We report that graph size can grow to ∼80,000 nodes when a corpus with ∼300 of internal documents is ingested using the same pipeline. One can therefore anticipate that relying only on lexical graphs, which have high precision but low domain specificity, would limit the use case of GraphRAG platforms for cross-project applications such as anomaly detection, or route designs based on historical insights. This limitation is addressed by anchoring a refined domain graph on top of the lexical graphs (see Figure 2). Consider the question “Which process steps have water and 2-MeTHF in common?” asked from Lexical_ and Domain_ReAct agents separately. Figure 5 contrasts (a) the lexical and (b) 14 the domain neighborhoods around the water and 2-MeTHF entities. In the lexical graph, both entities are extremely high-degree concepts: together they are mentioned in 2,233 distinct chunks, which with their parent sections and documents form a neighborhood of 2,971 nodes. The lexical agent must review those passages a few at a time to assemble a list of process steps, and return an incomplete list of two items, since it cannot observe every co-occurrence at once. The domain agent instead has access to a clean domain graph in which 121 canonical entities connect to water or 2-MeTHF. Its single tool returns each solvent’s typed neighbors in one query apiece, rather than the passage-level search the lexical agent must repeat; of the returned neighbors, 14 are adjacent to both solvents, with 5 of them as planned processes. In this case, the domain agent retrieves a clean list of 5 processes while the lexical agent answers an incomplete list. The domain agent also returns each entity with its source chunks, via the HAS_MENTION anchoring edges, so the answer remains checkable against the documents. The same traversal generalizes directly to anomaly and comparison questions—such as“which batch differs from the rest" and “what changed between versions”—which are impractical for chunk-by-chunk retrieval but natural over a resolved entity graph. a Lexical neighbourhood — 2,971 nodes        

> Document (37) Section (699) Chunk (1,417) Table (777) Figure (39) water and 2-MeTHF (2)
> water 2-MeTHF
> chemical substance (1) planned process (68) role (2) unit operation (50) HAS_ROLE (4) HAS_SPECIFIED_INPUT (131)
> bSemantic neighbourhood — 121 connected entities
> water 2-MeTHF
> Connected to water or 2-MeTHF (107) Shared by both (14) water and 2-MeTHF (2)

Figure 5: (a) lexical graph nodes connected to the water and 2-MeTHF canonical entities: 2,971 nodes spanning 2,233 chunks (of which 777 are tables) plus their parent sections and documents. (b) The 121 canonical entities connected to water or 2-MeTHF, with the 14 entities adjacent to both highlighted; these are the candidates from which the answer set is drawn. The compactness and contextual-awareness of the domain graph enables answering corpus-wide questions, such as “what process steps have water and 2-MeTHF in common?” in a single query. Node counts in the legends are computed, not transcribed. To this point, we have described how an agentic platform with two ReAct agents can address different query types, from keyword-oriented questions to corpus-wide aggregation under a certain ontology. At a higher level, we implement a router agent that selects the retrieval path and the corresponding ReAct agent, or their combination, according to query type. We further designed a small set of "unanchored/comparative" questions to compare the two agents head-to-head, scored 15 by an SME. Table 2 lists a representative subset of questions and the selected agent with the most accurate answer. The recurring success/failure modes are informative for a pattern to define for the router agent. In particular, the domain agent does better on most cross-document items; whereas the lexical agent is more accurate on judgment-and-narrative items. On corpus-wide and cross-document questions, the lexical agent typically returns a correct but incomplete list. One example question is "which process steps have acetonitrile as an input material?" Figure 6 summarizes the sample CMC questions best suited to each agent. The lexical agent is the right tool for precise, locally scoped needs: exact experimental conditions, material identity and batch lot numbers, safety and handling notes, figure and section cross-references, and narrative or content judgments. The domain agent is the right tool for questions whose answer is a property of the whole corpus in the context of process chemistry: corpus-wide aggregation and counting, document-or series-level uniqueness (exclusivity), entity evolution across document versions, cross-document overlap, directed synthesis-path connectivity, and process fan-in through shared inputs. The two are complementary and a router agent can combine them. Table 2: Representative questions comparing the domain and lexical agents head-to-head, from a small set of questions scored by a subject-matter expert. Cross-document aggregation, exclusivity, overlap and connectivity favor the domain agent; scope and narrative judgments favor the lexical agent.                     

> Representative question Selected agent Basis
> What process steps have water and 2-MeTHF in common? Domain Lexical list correct but incomplete Which process steps have acetonitrile as input material? Domain Lexical correct but incomplete Of all solvents across the documents, which top three were tested most? Domain Lexical correct but incomplete Which processes or chemicals are unique to report #18? Domain Structural exclusivity query How does turbo-Grignard connect to compound 6 in the chem-istry? Domain Multiple valid paths returned Which substances appear in both report series A and B? Domain Lexical partial; domain complete At what report version did the largest cyanation development occur? Lexical Passage reading & reasoning required I can read only 3 of 38 reports—which ones do you recommend? Lexical Judgement about scope and narrative Which report best describes the iodometric titration? Lexical Domain abstained; lexical listed documents Which process uses dimethylacetamide and runs in a CSTR? Tie Both correct and complementary What are all chemical inputs to the SNAr cyclization step? Tie Both correct; lexical used a detailed table

16 ROUTER AGENT 

> Classifies the question, Invokes one layer or both
> Exact experimental conditions
> “What temperatures were tested in …?”
> Narrative effort / importance judgment
> “At what report version did … happen?”
> Document scope & reading priority
> “Which report discusses … ?”
> Precise material identity
> “List the batch lot numbers for…”
> Safety and handling notes
> “Which materials have … requirements?”
> Figure / section cross-reference
> “In which section and figure …?”
> Document Section Chunk + embedding
> Lexical graph
> Canonical entity
> Domain graph
> PRECEDES | HAS_ROLE HAS_INOUT | HAS_OUTPUT HAS_PARTICIPANT
> HAS_MENTION
> Anchors each canonical entity to its source chunks
> Corpus-wide aggregation / counting
> “Across all processes, which … appear the most?”
> Document- or series-unique (exclusivity)
> “Which … are unique to … and not found in …?”
> Cross-document / series overlap
> “Which .. appear in both … and …?” “What appeared in … but not in …?”
> Directed synthesis path / connectivity
> “How does … connect to … in the developed process?”
> Process fan-in / shared inputs
> “Which steps use … as an input material?”
> Domain_ReAct
> Whole corpus properties
> Lexical_ReAct
> Precise & locally scoped facts
> Question

Figure 6: Question routing and the questions each layer serves. Every question enters the router agent, which invokes the domain agent (left), the lexical agent (right), or a hybrid mode holding both toolsets. The domain agent operates on process-chemistry concepts (canonical entities) and answers properties of the corpus as a whole; the lexical agent retrieves precise, locally scoped detail from chunks and their embeddings. HAS_MENTION runs from each canonical entity to the chunks that mention it, so a domain graph answer can usually be traced down to the passages that support it. 

# 4 Summary, Limitations and Outlook 

We presented an agentic platform with a dual-layer knowledge graph that turned a heterogeneous corpus of process-development documents into a queryable institutional memory. A knowledge layer, based on a lexical or precision graph, was built on lossless ingestion of a variety of document formats—digital, scanned, handwritten, and multilingual—to enable both search by keyword and search by meaning through hybrid vector-and-graph retrieval. A three-tier benchmarking protocol was introduced for comprehensive evaluation of the knowledge (lexical) layer. The assessment was based on 505 questions, designed by an LLM agent and validated by a human SME, over 38 development reports. We highlight the strengths and limitations of each assessment tier and emphasize the quality of the question bank for reporting benchmarking scores. The Lexical layer outperformed the vector-RAG baseline in both Tier-1 MCQ accuracy (95% vs 89%) and more significantly in Tier-2 pass rate (85% vs 65%). Tier-1 and Tier-2 contingency per question cohort revealed the failure taxonomy. While the lexical agent performed well on precise, locally scoped questions, it fell comparatively short on corpus-wide queries and unanchored questions, particularly those centered on domain knowledge. Those limitations were partly addressed by an ontology-guided intelligence layer, a unifying domain graph that was provenance-anchored to the lexical foundation. The domain graph benefits from global entity resolution—a step essential in CMC process development—and bridges otherwise isolated document chunks to answer the cross-document aggregation, comparison, and anomaly questions on which passage retrieval alone falters. The architecture provides modularity and admits extension to other scientific areas. The lexical 17 knowledge layer (Document, Section, and Chunk) is independent of project content, whereas the domain graph can adopt tailored ontologies (small molecule, large molecule, vaccines, etc.) to serve domain-specific queries. We anticipate extending the current architecture from dual- to multi-layer by adding material and equipment databases together with literature and compound data, in both internal and external formats. We emphasize that a general-purpose AI chatbot and a knowledge graph are not interchangeable. While internal chatbots can summarize a handful of uploaded documents quickly, they cannot hold an entire program in a bird’s-eye view. In the context of CMC synthetics, anomaly detection and corpus-wide aggregation are arguably the highest-value CMC questions during scale-up and filing. Answering them requires the unified, resolved, cross-document structure that the domain graph provides. Several limitations bound the present study, and we group them by what would be required to address each in future studies. 

Evidence for the domain graph. The three-tier protocol was applied to the Lexical_ReAct agent only. The domain graph was evaluated based on a small set of questions and was compared head-to-head with the Lexical_ReAct agent to reveal retrieval patterns for the router agent. A domain-agent benchmark at comparable scale, and across more documents and multiple projects, is the highest-priority next step. For regulated CMC applications, auditability matters as much as accuracy, and benchmarking must be part of the system. Our protocol converted a reassuring headline accuracy into an actionable map of where the platform can and cannot be trusted, and the failure taxonomy explained why. 

Isolating the graph’s contribution. The improvement of Lexical_ReAct over the vector-RAG baseline is attributed to the combination of the lexical graph and the agentic retrieval loop (Section 3.3), not to graph structure alone, because the agent and the baseline also differ in tool access, iteration budget, and prompt effort. An isolating experiment — using the same agent, prompt, and iteration budget, while toggling only graph-structural navigation tools against flat retrieval — must be run to distinguish the graph retrieval tool from the ReAct retrieval loop. 

Reproducibility. Extraction is not reproducible, and pinning the decoding temperature to zero did not make it so: two extractions of the same document at temperature zero, with hash randomization disabled, differed in entity count (83 versus 86) and in entity descriptions and chunk anchoring. The deterministic downstream phases did reproduce exactly, given fixed extraction output. Closing the remaining gap needs something stronger than a temperature setting — a seeded inference endpoint, or a verification pass that checks each proposed entity against the source span rather than simply accepting it. This is a prerequisite for future regulated use. 

Ontological depth. The class vocabulary was applied as a prompt-level schema and a consistency constraint, rather than as a loaded OWL artifact with a reasoner. Only five classes were instantiated in practice. Properly loading the OPC/PROCO ontologies (He and Schafer, 2020) and running a description-logic reasoner would permit inferred relationships and formal consistency checking, neither of which we currently exploit. Richer ontology coverage—particularly around impurities, fate, and purge, and control strategy—would deepen the classes of anomaly that the graph can surface. 

Reaction schemes. Several benchmark questions had to be excluded because their answers resided in figures that the pipeline does not read. A high-accuracy vision-language model that converts reaction-scheme images into structured representations (CDXML or CML) would close this gap; reaction schemes are dense with mechanistic meaning and would improve domain graph fidelity during ingestion. 

Entity-resolution precision. The domain graph extraction inherits LLM error modes. An explicit grounding and verification pass in the style of ODKE+ (Khorshidi et al., 2025) and confidence-18 weighted canonicalization would tighten domain graph precision. We detected two specific extraction quality issues that required correction prior to building the domain graph: under-populated solvent roles and over-tagging of strong bases as catalysts. 

Router quality. The rules for the routing agent were defined based on a head-to-head comparison of the Lexical_ and Domain_ReAct agents with two caveats worth mentioning: first, the question set was small and limited to one project’s documents; second, the human SME selected the winner answer without blinding to which agent produced which answer. A future experiment should run the router over the 505-question bank, while recording its decision to select the answering agent alongside every answer. By doing so, a correctly routed question answered badly is charged to the answering agent and not to the router. That work should follow the domain graph benchmark, since routing accuracy is only interpretable once both destinations are independently characterized. 

Large Context LLM vs GraphRAG. A modern long-context LLM can be an alternative approach to the GraphRAG pipeline discussed in this paper if the corpora size is small to moderate. Indeed, for a testbed of 52,000 (38 documents), a long-context LLM given the full corpus might score comparably to either the vector-RAG or Lexical_ReAct. While the comparison is not tested here, we argue that the graph’s motivating regime is found in multi-hundred-document programs mentioned in Section 2.1. A typical project of 300+ internal documents imposes challenges with cost, scale, structural reasoning, and updates when processed with flat retrieval. Finally, the platform architecture and benchmarking protocol introduced here are not specific to CMC process development: the failure taxonomy is a general instrument for classifying why an MCQ-plus-judge benchmark’s two tiers disagree, and the same failure codes apply unchanged to any RAG or agentic system scored the same way. More broadly, we expect biopharmaceutical organizations to move from siloed, document-centric knowledge management toward graph-based institutional memory, and we anticipate that shared benchmarking practices and process-chemistry ontologies will become necessary infrastructure for making such systems trustworthy, auditable, and comparable across the industry. Turning fragmented technical records into a queryable, provenance-anchored graph is, in this sense, the more direct route from document silos to process intelligence. 

# Author Contributions 

Reza Amirmoshiri conceived and led the platform, developed the lexical and semantic pipelines and the benchmarking, and wrote the manuscript. Faryad Sahneh contributed to the generative-AI methodology, platform architecture, and programming. Yasser Jangjou initiated the project roadmap, provided CMC process-development guidance, and use-case definition. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript. 

# Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Mohan Boggara and Robert Ronnback for their comments on the draft of the article. We thank Sanofi US for granting permission to publish this work. 

# Data Availability and Ethics 

The reported testbed belongs to a discontinued Sanofi small-molecule program (the RIPK1 inhibitor oditrasertib). The underlying documents contain proprietary information and cannot be released; the process patent for this compound is available separately (Leszczak et al., 2018). The larger internal corpus referenced for scale is confidential. No human-subjects or animal data was used. 19 Conflicts of Interest 

The authors are employees of Sanofi US. The authors declare no other competing interests. 

# References 

Allotrope Foundation. Allotrope foundation ontologies (AFO). http://docs.allotrope.org/ ,2024. Robert Arp, Barry Smith, and Andrew D. Spear. Building Ontologies with Basic Formal Ontology .MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2015. ISBN 9780262527811. Christoph Auer, Maksym Lysak, Ahmed Nassar, Michele Dolfi, Nikolaos Livathinos, Panos Vagenas, Cesar Berrospi Ramis, Matteo Omenetti, Fabian Lindlbauer, Kasper Dinkla, Lucas Morin, Valery Weber, Viktor Kuropiatnyk, Rohit Mishra, and Peter W. J. Staar. Docling technical report. arXiv preprint, 2024. Stephen Bonner, Ian P. Barrett, Cheng Ye, Rowan Swiers, Ola Engkvist, Andreas Bender, Charles Ta-pley Hoyt, and William L. Hamilton. A review of biomedical datasets relating to drug discov-ery: A knowledge graph perspective. Briefings in Bioinformatics , 23(6):bbac404, 2022. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac404. Markus J. Buehler. Accelerating scientific discovery with generative knowledge extraction, graph-based representation, and multimodal intelligent graph reasoning. Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 5:035083, 2024. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ad7228. Francesco Destro and Massimiliano Barolo. A review on the modernization of pharmaceutical development and manufacturing — trends, perspectives, and the role of mathematical modeling. 

International Journal of Pharmaceutics , 620:121715, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.121715. Joseph A. DiMasi, Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen. Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: New estimates of R&D costs. Journal of Health Economics , 47:20–33, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.01.012. Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A Graph RAG approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint, 2024. Suzanne S. Farid, Max Baron, Christos Stamatis, Wenhao Nie, and Jon Coffman. Benchmarking biopharmaceutical process development and manufacturing cost contributions to R&D. mAbs , 12 (1):1754999, 2020. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2020.1754999. Bhavika Gondi, Desaisetty Venkata Satya Sai Swapnith, et al. PharmaSense AI: An advanced pharmaceutical intelligence system using knowledge graphs and multi-agent NLP. Procedia Computer Science , 283:3852–3861, 2026. Leaelaf Hailemariam and Venkat Venkatasubramanian. Purdue ontology for pharmaceutical en-gineering: Part II. applications. Journal of Pharmaceutical Innovation , 5:139–146, 2010. doi: 10.1007/s12247-010-9091-1. 20 Oliver He and Wes Schafer. Extending the Allotrope framework: An ontological representation and analysis of process chemistry, 2020. Oral presentation, 2020 Fall Allotrope Connect Virtual Conference, 30 September 2020. Ontology subsequently renamed PROCO (formerly OPC). Ajaz S. Hussain, Kenneth Morris, and Vadim J. Gurvich. NIPTE 2030: The nation’s digital trust anchor for Pharma 5.0. Pharmaceutical Research , 2026. doi: 10.1007/s11095-026-04118-z. International Council for Harmonisation. ICH harmonised tripartite guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical quality system. https://www.ich.org/page/quality-guidelines , 2008. ICH Guideline, Step 4 version. International Council for Harmonisation. ICH harmonised tripartite guideline Q8(R2): Pharma-ceutical development. https://www.ich.org/page/quality-guidelines , 2009. ICH Guideline, Step 4 version. Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint, 2023. Samira Khorshidi, Azadeh Nikfarjam, Suprita Shankar, Yisi Sang, Yash Govind, Hyun Jang, Ali Kasgari, Alexis McClimans, Mohamed Soliman, Vishnu Konda, Ahmed Fakhry, and Xiaoguang Qi. ODKE+: Ontology-guided open-domain knowledge extraction with LLMs. arXiv preprint, 2025. Jean-Philippe Leszczak et al. Process for synthesis of 4-(3,3-difluoro-2,2-dimethyl-propanoyl)-3,5-dihydro-2h-pyrido[3,4-f][1,4]oxazepine-9-carbonitrile, nov 2018. URL https://patents.google. com/patent/WO2025006575A1/en?oq=WO2025006575A1 . International Patent Application. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, pages 9459–9474, 2020. Z. Li, Y. Shi, and B. Lin. Process-oriented dual-layer knowledge GraphRAG for reservoir engineering decision support. Processes , 13(10):3230, 2025. doi: 10.3390/pr13103230. Zongren Li, Qin Zhong, Jing Yang, Yongjie Duan, Wenjun Wang, Chengkun Wu, and Kunlun He. DeepKG: An end-to-end deep learning-based workflow for biomedical knowledge graph extraction, optimization and applications. Bioinformatics , 38(5):1477–1479, 2022. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/btab767. Nikolaos Livathinos, Christoph Auer, Maksym Lysak, Ahmed Nassar, Michele Dolfi, Panos Vagenas, Cesar Berrospi Ramis, Matteo Omenetti, Kasper Dinkla, Yusik Kim, Shubham Gupta, Rafael Teixeira de Lima, Valery Weber, Lucas Morin, Ingmar Meijer, Viktor Kuropiatnyk, and Peter W. J. Staar. Docling: An efficient open-source toolkit for AI-driven document conversion. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2025. IBM Research. Vipul Mann, Shekhar K. Viswanath, Shankarraman Vaidyaraman, Jayanth Balakrishnan, and Venkat Venkatasubramanian. SUSIE: Pharmaceutical CMC ontology-based information extraction for drug development using machine learning. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 179:108446, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2023.108446. 21 Chantal L. Mustoe, Alice J. Turner, Stephanie J. Urwin, Ian Houson, Helen Feilden, Daniel Markl, Mohammed M. Al Qaraghuli, Magdalene W. S. Chong, Murray Robertson, Alison Nordon, Blair F. Johnston, Cameron J. Brown, John Robertson, Claire Adjiman, Hannah Batchelor, Brahim Benyahia, Massimo Bresciani, Christopher L. Burcham, Javier Cardona, Ciro Cottini, Andrew S. Dunn, David Fradet, Gavin W. Halbert, Mark Henson, Pirmin Hidber, Marianne Langston, Ye Seol Lee, Wei Li, Jérôme Mantanus, John McGinty, Bhavik Mehta, Tabbasum Naz, Sara Ottoboni, Elke Prasad, Per-Ola Quist, Gavin K. Reynolds, Chris Rielly, Martin Rowland, Walkiria Schlindwein, Sven L. M. Schroeder, Jan Sefcik, Ettore Settanni, Humera Siddique, Kenneth Smith, Rachel Smith, Jagjit Singh Srai, Alpana A. Thorat, Antony Vassileiou, and Alastair J. Florence. Quality by digital design to accelerate sustainable medicines development. 

International Journal of Pharmaceutics , 681:125625, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2025.125625. Pistoia Alliance. Pharmaceutical CMC process ontology (ISA-88/95 extension), phases 1–3. https: //www.pistoiaalliance.org/projects/pharmaceutical-cmc-process-ontology/ , 2024. Miguel Francisco M. Remolona, Matthew F. Conway, Sriram Balasubramanian, Linxi Fan, Ziyan Feng, Tianhao Gu, Hyungtae Kim, Prasad M. Nirantar, Sarah Panda, Nithin R. Ranabothu, Neha Rastogi, and Venkat Venkatasubramanian. Hybrid ontology-learning materials engineering system for pharmaceutical products: Multi-label entity recognition and concept detection. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 107:49–60, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2017.03.012. System referred to as HOLMES. Estelle Scifo. Graph Data Science with Neo4j: Learn How to Use Neo4j 5 with Graph Data Science Library 2.0 and Its Python Driver . Packt Publishing, 2023. Aylin Sertkaya and Carolyn Berger. Drug development. Technical report, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, September 2024. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK611884/ . Accessed 2026-07-24. Naz Pinar Taskiran, Chia-En Jacklyn Tsai, Shuxin Huang, Arijit Chakraborty, and Venkat Venkata-subramanian. A knowledge-graph-based pharmaceutical engineering chatbot for drug discovery. 

Computers & Chemical Engineering , page 109318, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2025.109318. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry: INDs for Phase 2 and Phase 3 studies — chemistry, manufacturing, and controls information. https://www.fda.gov/ regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents , 2003. Center for Drug Evalu-ation and Research (CDER). Venkat Venkatasubramanian, Chunhua Zhao, Girish Joglekar, Ankur Jain, Leaelaf Hailemariam, Pradeep Suresh, Pavankumar Akkisetty, Kenneth Morris, and G. V. Reklaitis. Purdue ontology for pharmaceutical engineering: Part I. conceptual framework. Journal of Pharmaceutical Innovation ,1(1):88–98, 2006. doi: 10.1007/BF02784863. Shekhar Viswanath, Steve Guntz, Jon Dieringer, Shankarraman Vaidyaraman, Hua Wang, and Chrysanthos E. Gounaris. An ontology to describe small molecule pharmaceutical product devel-opment and methodology for optimal activity scheduling. Journal of Pharmaceutical Innovation ,17:155–169, 2022. doi: 10.1007/s12247-020-09505-6. Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yunli Qi, Jingkun Chen, Min Xu, Filippo Menolascina, Yueming Jin, and Vicente Grau. Medical Graph RAG: Evidence-based medical large language model via graph 22 retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 28443–28467, 2025. Zhentao Xu, Mark Jerome Cruz, Matthew Guevara, Tie Wang, Manasi Deshpande, Xiaofeng Wang, and Zheng Li. Retrieval-augmented generation with knowledge graphs for customer service question answering. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’24) , pages 2905–2909, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3626772.3661370. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. Yuan Zhang, Xin Sui, Feng Pan, Kaixian Yu, Keqiao Li, Shubo Tian, Arslan Erdengasileng, Qing Han, Wanjing Wang, Jianan Wang, et al. A comprehensive large-scale biomedical knowledge graph for AI-powered data-driven biomedical research. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7(4):602–614, 2025. Xianrui Zhong, Bowen Jiang, Ayushi Bhattacharjee, Bowen Jin, Yifan Zhang, Chenyan Xiong, and Jiawei Han. Benchmarking retrieval-augmented generation for chemistry. arXiv preprint, 2025. Introduces CHEMRAG-BENCH and CHEMRAG-TOOLKIT. 

# A Question generation 

A.1 Question-designer agent 

The question-designer agent reads the per-document extraction JSON and emits multiple-choice items in a fixed schema. The prompt is assembled per document from a common preamble plus two switchable rule blocks — one for anchoring mode and difficulty — to generate four cohorts. The schema fields are: stem, four options, the correct letter, an explanation, a verbatim evidence quote, the evidence location, the source document, a question-type label, and a confidence score. Two further mechanisms control item quality. A diversity hint injects the previous five stems and the facets already covered for that document, instructing the model to prioritize uncovered facets. A mirror-overlap filter rejects a distractor only when its word overlap with the gold option is at least 0.78 and its numeric tokens are identical and its character-level similarity ratio is at least 0.75; the numeric condition is what preserves legitimately discriminating pairs such as “3.5 min at 30 °C” versus “2.0 min at 50 °C”. The following four items are taken unmodified from the evaluated question bank. The correct option is marked ( ⋆). 

Easy-unanchored (question type: analytical method). What melting point was determined for Compound F by DSC analysis? 

A. 75.0 °C B. 71.1 °C ( ⋆)C. 65.8 °C D. 69.4 °C 

Evidence: "The melting point for Compound F was found to be 71.1 °C, with an onset melting temperature of 69.4 °C." (Table 50 Discussion, TR-1-083-#10 )23 Hard-anchored (question type: procedure). In TR-1-083-#13, Table 51 details the prepara-tion of the TFA salt of RA-X35. What solvent and volume were used to dissolve 1.0 g of RA-X35 before TFA addition? 

A. 10 mL of 2-MeTHF B. 10 mL of acetonitrile C. 10 mL of MTBE ( ⋆)D. 5 mL of heptane 

Evidence: “RA-X35 input: 1.0 g; MTBE amount: 10 mL”( TR-1-083-#13 , Table 51). (Note the stem names the document and the table, and every distractor is a solvent that appears elsewhere in the same report.) 

Hard-unanchored (question type: process conditions). During the continuous quench implementation for the S’1–S2 demonstration run, what pH value was maintained in the CSTR while delivering the aqueous acid solution? 

A. pH fluctuated between 11 and 13 during the run B. pH dropped to 5 after the first 30 minutes of operation C. pH stabilized at 7 after initial equilibration D. pH remained around 9 throughout the continuous quench ( ⋆)

Evidence: “The reactor was stirred vigorously ( >500 rpm) and a pH probe was used to monitor the pH of the mixture, which remained around 9.” (Section 4.3.1, K9-13 demonstration run). The stem names no document, so the agent must locate the run by its technical description alone. 

Comparative (question type: comparative). What major shift in research focus occurred between report series TR-1-2018 and TR-1-2020? 

A. All steps received equal attention in both reports B. Emphasis moved from Steps 1, 1’, 2, and 5 to Steps 3 and 4 ( ⋆)C. Focus shifted entirely to analytical method development D. Emphasis moved from Steps 3 and 4 to Steps 1, 1’, 2, and 5 

Evidence: “In the previous work package, TR-1-2018, emphasis was placed on investigating S1, S’1, S2, and S5, while S3 and S4 were only preliminarily investigated. In the work package TR-1-2020, we focus on . . . ” (TR-1-2018 → TR-1-2020, Report Summary and Project Background). Option D is the same claim with the direction reversed, which is the distractor pattern the comparative generator is designed to produce. 

# B T1/T2 concordance and the paraphrase trap 

24 Table 3: Judge score × embedding-similarity contingency, per cohort and pooled, at judge_score ≥ 4threshold and each cohort’s own median similarity split. Columns: on-topic = judge high, sim. high (expected correct); paraphrased = judge high, sim. low (correct but divergent phrasing); 

trap = judge low, sim. high (the paraphrase trap: judge says wrong, embedding says similar); 

off-topic = judge low, sim. low (expected fail).                                           

> Cohort nmed. sim. on-topic paraphrased trap off-topic ρ
> Easy-mixed 86 0.764 43 36 070.27 Hard-anchored 164 0.765 78 75 470.17 Hard-unanchored 187 0.713 83 65 11 28 0.28 Comparative 68 0.710 28 20 713 0.39 Combined 505 —232 196 22 55 0.28

# C Worked head-to-head example: shared solvents 

This appendix gives the answers behind the example in Section 3.4, for the question “Which process steps have water and 2-MeTHF in common?” . Answers are reproduced as returned, truncated for length. 

C.1 Lexical agent 

Two process steps have water and MeTHF in common: 

1. S2 — Oxime Elimination to Nitrile (Reaction Step). The elimination of oxime 9 to form nitrile 7 occurs in MeTHF at 60 °C with 1.2 equiv. of CDI. Water sensitivity was specifically assessed for this step to determine if it could be telescoped from the oxime formation without removing water. Experiments were conducted in MeTHF with water content ranging from anhydrous ( <100 ppm) to saturated ( ∼4%). (Source: TR-1-2018#8.docx, section 3.2.4.2) 

2. S3 — SNAr Workup (Extraction Step). The workup procedure for the SNAr reaction involves DI water extraction of the crude reaction mixture in MeTHF. Table 10 shows workup conditions for experiment SB01-71 using DI water extraction at a 1:1 volume ratio to crude solution. (Source: TR-1-2018-#2, Table 10) 

The two steps returned are correct and each is properly cited. The answer is nonetheless incomplete: the agent stops after two, because water and 2-MeTHF are together mentioned in 2,233 chunks and it can only inspect a few at a time. 

C.2 Domain agent 

The following process steps have both water and 2-MeTHF (2-methyltetrahydrofuran) in common: 1. dgf03_037_purification_3_5_dibromo — a purification unit operation that uses water and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran to purify 3,5-dibromo-4-chloropyridine 2. azeotropic_drying_methf — an azeotropic drying operation that uses water and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran along with magnesium sulfate to remove compound F 3. phase_separation — a general phase separation operation with inputs including water, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and various compounds 4. aqueous_quench — a quenching operation that uses 2-methyltetrahydrofuran as solvent with aqueous workup components 5. heptane_backwash_aqueous — uses 2-methyltetrahydrofuran in the organic phase with aqueous backwashing 

25 These processes are primarily workup and purification operations where MeTHF serves as the organic solvent. 

C.3 Expert assessment 

Two observations qualify this example. First, the two agents answer at different levels of description: the lexical agent names synthesis steps in the report’s own vocabulary (S2, S3) with quantitative conditions, whereas the domain agent names canonical unit operations. Both are legitimate readings of “process step”, and a router that combined them would return the resolved set and the conditions. Second, the domain agent’s answer inherits its entity names from extraction, so identifiers such as dgf03_037_phase_separation are machine-generated rather than terms a chemist would use; improving primary-name selection during canonicalization would make these answers more readable without changing the retrieval. 26