Title: Lit3R: Retrieve-Relate-Read for Evidence-Grounded Question Answering over Scientific Literature

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.16912v1

Published Time: Wed, 16 Sep 2026 00:59:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Lit3R: Retrieve–Relate–Read for Evidence-Grounded Question Answering over Scientific Literature 

Akira Ise ♠ Kotaro Kumagai ♠ Yuta Yamaguchi ♠ Hisanori Ozaki ♠♣ 

Yukio Uematsu ♠ Ikuya Yamada ♠♡ ♠Tokyo University of Science ♣Dentsu Soken Inc. ♡Studio Ousia 

{6323007,6323037,6323147}@ed.tus.ac.jp {ozaki.hisanori,yukio,ikuya}@rs.tus.ac.jp 

Abstract 

We describe tus-nlp ’s Lit3R (Retrieve– Relate–Read) system for LitTraceQA, a shared task for literature-grounded question answer-ing that requires systems to retrieve relevant papers, identify supporting evidence, and gen-erate answers. Lit3R combines off-the-shelf retrieval, reranking, and large language model (LLM) components without task-specific train-ing. The retriever iteratively combines BM25-based sparse and dense retrieval, cross-encoder reranking, and LLM-based verification, and complements retrieval based on the question with paper-to-paper expansion. The reader first identifies supporting evidence within individ-ual papers and then synthesizes evidence across papers to produce the final answer and evidence trace. On the official test set, our system ranked 4th on the leaderboard. Our code is avail-able at https://github.com/tus-ist-nlp/ littraceqa .

1 Introduction 

The LitTraceQA shared task (Liu et al., 2026) at the GroundLM 2026 workshop (Wang et al., 2026) requires systems to retrieve relevant papers, iden-tify supporting evidence, and generate an answer grounded in that evidence. LitTraceQA evaluates these stages separately, making the evidence trace from papers to answers observable. The task pro-vides only 55 labeled validation questions, offering very limited supervision for training task-specific components. We therefore build a modular pipeline from off-the-shelf retrieval, reranking, and large language model (LLM) components without task-specific training. Our system extends the standard retriever–reader architecture (Chen et al., 2017) with an interme-diate Relate step that expands retrieved candidate papers using relations between papers. We refer to this Retrieve–Relate–Read architecture as Lit3R .Some questions in LitTraceQA require combining evidence across multiple papers, even when some relevant papers have only weak lexical or seman-tic similarity to the question. The Relate step is designed to recover such papers after the initial question-anchored retrieval. Specifically, the Retrieve step performs iterative question-anchored retrieval: an LLM decomposes the question into subqueries, retrieval is performed using these subqueries, and an LLM verifier de-cides whether the evidence gathered so far is suf-ficient or another round is needed. We combine BM25-based sparse retrieval and dense retrieval into a unified ranking of candidate papers. In each retrieval round, a cross-encoder reranker reranks the retrieved candidates, and an LLM verifier deter-mines whether another round of retrieval is needed. The Relate step then constructs a paper-to-paper ranking through similarity-based expansion from the top retrieved papers and fuses this ranking with the question-anchored ranking. The Read step receives the top candidate pa-pers from the retrieval pipeline and operates in two stages. It first performs paper-local reading to determine which candidate papers are relevant and contain supporting evidence. It then performs cross-paper synthesis, combining evidence across the selected papers to generate the final answer together with the supporting paper identifiers and evidence locators in the required format. Our experiments show that the Retrieve step alone achieves strong candidate-paper recall, with further improvements from the Relate step. In end-to-end evaluation on the official test set, Lit3R achieves 4th place on the leaderboard. 

2 Method 

Our system follows a two-stage retriever–reader pipeline. The retriever comprises the Retrieve and Relate steps, which together produce a ranked list of 50 candidate papers. The reader then determines arXiv:2609.16912v1 [cs.CL] 15 Sep 2026 Retriever Reader        

> Question Query Decomposition Hybrid Retrieval Paper-level Fusion Chunk Reranking Evidence Verification
> If evidence is insufficient
> Final Chunk Pool Ranking A Paper-to-Paper Expansion Ranking B A/B Rank Fusion
> If evidence is sufficient Verifier-supported papers Top-ranked paper
> Top-50 Papers Local Reading Cross-Paper Synthesis Output

Figure 1: Overview of our retrieve–relate–read system. Hybrid retrieval, paper-level fusion and chunk reranking run once per subquery, and the reranked chunks accumulate in a pool shared across rounds for evidence verification. If the evidence is insufficient, the verifier’s report drives a new decomposition, for at most three rounds. After retrieval, Ranking A is combined with Ranking B from paper-to-paper expansion. The fused top 50 papers are then processed by local reading and cross-paper synthesis to produce the final output. 

which of these papers support the answer, identifies the supporting evidence, and generates the final answer in the required format. Figure 1 provides an overview of the retriever’s two candidate-ranking lanes and the reader’s two-stage processing. 

2.1 Retriever 

The retriever constructs two complementary paper rankings. Ranking A is question-anchored: it ag-gregates evidence retrieved for the question and its subqueries. Ranking B is paper-anchored: it expands from seed papers that are likely to be rel-evant. Ranking B aims to reach relevant papers a question never names. A question involving multi-ple papers typically concerns a line of related work and often names only one of the papers involved ex-plicitly; the remaining relevant papers are its close neighbors in that line, and sit far from the question itself in both lexical and dense space. We combine the two rankings through the A/B Rank Fusion step to produce the final candidate ranking. 

2.1.1 Corpus preparation 

The corpus contains 27,487 papers from recent machine learning, computer vision, and natural lan-guage processing venues held in 2024 and 2025. We convert each paper PDF into structured content with MinerU 1, whose pipeline backend composes separate layout, OCR, formula and table models (Appendix B), separating body text, tables, figures, and equations, and keeping each paper’s title and abstract as a unit of its own. We then split the extracted content into chunks, yielding 2,564,545 indexed chunks of five types: body text (65.4%), equations and algorithms (12.8%), figures (12.5%), tables (8.3%), and one title-and-abstract chunk per paper (1.1%). Splitting respects paragraph, page and heading boundaries and stops at 2,000 charac-ters. 

2.1.2 Question-anchored retrieval 

Our retriever has two LLM-based steps: query de-composition and evidence verification . Both use 

> 1https://github.com/opendatalab/MinerU

the same Azure OpenAI GPT-5.4 model. We per-form iterative retrieval for at most three rounds. In the first round, the query decomposition step generates four subqueries from the original ques-tion. In subsequent rounds, it generates at most four, conditioned on the original question together with previously issued subqueries and the missing information identified in the preceding verification step. Retrieval stops if no subqueries are generated. When a question names a venue and a year, the decomposition prompt additionally instructs the model to begin every subquery with a tag of the form [VENUE YEAR] , which the title-and-abstract chunk of each paper carries at its start. For each subquery, the hybrid retrieval step uses three indexes: chunk-level BM25, paper-level BM25 over the concatenated chunks of each pa-per, and a dense chunk index built with Qwen3-Embedding-8B (Zhang et al., 2025). Both BM25 indexes use k1 = 1 .5 and b = 0 .75 . For each index output, we form a paper-level ranking by using the highest-ranked chunk to represent each paper. The 

paper-level fusion then combines the three paper rankings using equal-weight reciprocal rank fusion (RRF) (Cormack et al., 2009). with k = 60 .Furthermore, pseudo-relevance feedback is ap-plied once per subquery in each round. For each subquery, we first apply paper-level fusion to the re-sults from the three indexes as described above. We then append the first 512 characters of the title and abstract of the top-ranked paper of that ranking to the subquery, retrieve again with the same three in-dexes, and fuse the original and expanded rankings with equal weights. This incorporates terminology from the top-ranked paper that may be absent from the question. The intuition behind this is that pa-pers describe themselves in their own terms: one gold paper names its own method where the ques-tion uses a general one. Appending the top-ranked paper’s opening supplies that vocabulary. The ex-pansion runs once per subquery, before reranking, at the cost of one additional sweep over the indexes. The chunk reranking step is performed once per subquery in every round. We score up to 200 chunks of the fused and pseudo-relevance-feedback-expanded ranking with Qwen3-Reranker-8B (Zhang et al., 2025), and rank them by s =0.6/(k + rret ) + 0 .4/(k + rrr ) with k = 60 ,where rret and rrr are the ranks from retrieval and from the reranker. The top 20 chunks of the re-trieval ranking are pinned above all others, so that candidates strongly supported by the lexical and dense signals are not discarded, and the 20 highest-scoring chunks go to the pool. Reranked chunks from all subqueries accumu-late in a shared pool. If a chunk is retrieved by multiple subqueries, we merge the duplicate oc-currences and retain the highest reranker score as-signed across those occurrences. A chunk’s score in the pool is the maximum of the scores it re-ceived, taken over every subquery that returned it. The number of subqueries that returned a chunk therefore plays no part in the rule: a chunk returned by two subqueries and a chunk returned by five are treated identically. At the end of each round, the evidence verifica-tion step uses an LLM to assess the top 20 papers in the shared pool, ranked according to the maximum score among their corresponding chunks. Each paper is represented by its two highest-scoring chunks, each truncated to 1,800 characters to fit the verification prompt. The LLM reports which papers contain evidence, whether the pool contains sufficient evidence to answer the question and, if not, what information is still missing. The next query decomposition step targets this missing infor-mation. The papers reported as containing evidence are carried forward as seed papers for the paper-anchored expansion of §2.1.3. The pool is left as it is: verified chunks stay in it and continue to con-tribute to Ranking A, and the next round queries the whole corpus again, since a subquery aimed at the missing information may return a paper the pool already holds. The pool is retained across rounds. Retrieval stops when the evidence is suf-ficient, when query decomposition returns no new subquery, or after the third round. After the final retrieval round, we form Rank-ing A by grouping chunks in the shared pool by paper and assigning each paper the highest score among its chunks. 

2.1.3 Paper-to-paper expansion 

The paper-to-paper expansion step constructs Ranking B from a seed list consisting of the top-ranked paper in Ranking A and the papers identi-fied in the evidence verification step as supporting evidence. For each seed paper, we retrieve neigh-bors from three complementary signals. First, we use SPECTER2 (Singh et al., 2023), a scientific-document embedding model, to retrieve papers with title-and-abstract embeddings similar to the seed paper’s embedding. Second, we use biblio-graphic coupling (Kessler, 1963) to retrieve papers with overlapping reference lists: we compare the sets of cited paper identifiers using Jaccard sim-ilarity and require at least two shared references. Third, we query the paper-level BM25 index with the first 1,200 characters of the seed paper’s in-dexed text, which consist primarily of its title and abstract. We pass this text to the index unchanged, without selecting or weighting individual words. Each signal scores every corpus paper against every seed paper, yielding one ranked list per seed paper. When multiple seed papers are available, we merge their neighbor lists separately within each source by round-robin rank: we take each seed paper’s first unseen neighbor before considering any seed paper’s second neighbor. We then fuse the three source-specific lists using equal-weight RRF with k = 60 , retain the top 100 papers, and place the seed papers at the front of Ranking B. Finally, the A/B rank fusion step combines Rank-ings A and B using equal-weight RRF with k = 10 ,taking Ranking A at full length so that a paper sup-ported by Ranking B is still available. The smaller 

k confines the benefit of appearing in both rankings to their upper positions: a paper at position r in both scores 2/(k + r) against 1/(k + 1) for the top paper of Ranking A alone, which at k = 10 favours the former within the first eleven positions. The resulting top 50 papers are passed to the reader. 

2.2 Reader 

The reader receives the top 50 candidate papers, question, answer schema, and paper text, figures and tables. It produces the paper identifiers, evi-dence locators, and the final answer. The figures and tables are extracted using MinerU. The reader follows two stages: paper-local reading followed by cross-paper synthesis. 

2.2.1 Local reading 

This step identifies candidate papers that provide supporting evidence. Each query–paper pair is pro-cessed independently to assess paper relevance, the presence of sufficient evidence, and the supporting chunks. Only papers with relevant, valid support-ing evidence proceed to the cross-paper synthesis step. 

2.2.2 Cross-paper synthesis 

This step combines evidence from the papers se-lected during paper-local reading to produce the final answer. It extracts the facts needed to an-swer the question, together with their values, units,                                    

> kSingle (26) Multi (29) All (55) 10.846 0.222 0.517 51.000 0.585 0.781 10 1.000 0.746 0.866 20 1.000 0.836 0.914 50 1.000 0.940 0.968
> Table 1: Candidate recall of our retriever on the validation set. Single and Multi correspond to
> hidden_source_single_paper and multi_paper , re-spectively, with the number of questions shown in paren-theses.
> Configuration Multi (29) All (55) Ranking A only 0.647 0.814 Final system (Ranking A+B) 0.940 0.968
> Table 2: Validation candidate recall@50 of system vari-ants on multi_paper questions (Multi) and the full val-idation set (All).

source papers, and supporting chunks, and inte-grates them across papers when necessary. It then performs any required calculations or comparisons and generates the answer in the task-specified for-mat, together with the supporting paper identifiers and evidence locators. For multiple-choice ques-tions, it selects among the provided options; for table questions, it constructs the required rows and columns from the retrieved evidence. 

3 Experiments 

We use the 55 validation questions to set the sys-tem configuration and hyperparameters of both the retriever and reader, and the 71 test questions for final evaluation. The task defines two question types: hidden_source_single_paper , in which each question has one gold evidence paper, and 

multi_paper , in which each question has multi-ple gold evidence papers. The validation set con-tains 26 and 29 questions of these types, respec-tively. Questions of the latter type have three to nine gold evidence papers, with a median of four. Appendix A provides further details. To evaluate the retriever, we report recall@ k,computed as the macro average across questions of the fraction of gold evidence papers appearing in the top-k candidate list. Given the limited devel-opment period of the shared task, our component-level experiments focus only on the retriever. End-to-end performance, including supporting-paper selection, evidence grounding, and answer correct-Component Metric name Score Paper retrieval paper_precision_macro 1.000 Paper retrieval paper_recall_macro 0.989 Paper retrieval paper_f1_macro 0.992 Evidence grounding evidence_precision_macro 0.739 Evidence grounding evidence_recall_macro 0.761 Evidence grounding evidence_f1_macro 0.737 Multiple choice multiple_choice_accuracy 1.000 Table answer table_row_f1_macro 0.529 Table answer table_cell_accuracy_macro 0.309 Table answer table_cell_accuracy_micro 0.332 

Table 3: Official test-set results. 

ness, is evaluated using the official test-set leader-board. 

3.1 Retriever analysis 

As shown in Table 1, the final retriever achieves a validation recall@50 of 0.968. The 

hidden_source_single_paper questions reach a 

recall@5 of 1.000, whereas multi_paper ques-tions remain more difficult. At k = 1 , recall is 0.846 for single-paper questions but only 0.222 for multi-paper questions. Multi-paper recall then increases steadily as the candidate budget grows, reaching 0.940 at k = 50 .Table 2 compares Ranking A with the final sys-tem, which augments Ranking A with Ranking B obtained through paper-to-paper expansion. Over-all, recall@50 increases from 0.814 to 0.968. The gain is particularly large on multi-paper questions, where recall increases from 0.647 to 0.940. Rank-ing B complements question-anchored Ranking A using semantic, bibliographic, and lexical paper-to-paper relations, helping recover relevant papers whose connection to the question is not readily apparent. The substantial gain on multi-paper ques-tions validates the effectiveness of the Relate step. 

3.2 Official test-set results 

Table 3 shows the official test-set results. Lit3R achieves near-perfect paper retrieval with a macro F1 of 0.992, a macro evidence F1 of 0.737, and perfect multiple-choice accuracy, while table an-swering remains more challenging. Overall, Lit3R ranks 4th on the official leaderboard, demonstrat-ing the effectiveness of the training-free Retrieve– Relate–Read pipeline. 

4 Conclusion 

We proposed a training-free retrieve–relate–read system for LitTraceQA. The retriever separately constructs a question-anchored ranking and a paper-to-paper ranking, then fuses them to create a 50-paper candidate set. In a controlled comparison, adding paper-to-paper expansion increases multi-paper recall@50 from 0.647 to 0.940. The reader selects evidence papers, identifies grounded evi-dence, and constructs answers under determinis-tic validation. On the official test set, our system ranked 4th on the leaderboard. 

Limitations 

Our evaluation is limited to LitTraceQA, with the same 55 validation questions used for configura-tion selection and retriever analysis. Generaliza-tion to other domains and question types remains untested. Our experiments do not isolate the con-tributions of individual expansion signals or reader stages to end-to-end performance, nor identify the causes of the remaining evidence-grounding and table-answering errors. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the GroundLM 2026 organizers for con-structing the LitTraceQA benchmark and running the shared task. We also thank Masatoshi Suzuki of Studio Ousia for taking part in our meetings and for his advice. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP26K25597. 

References 

Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Reading Wikipedia to answer open-domain questions. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1870–1879. Gordon V. Cormack, Charles L. A. Clarke, and Stefan Büttcher. 2009. Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods. In 

Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , pages 758–759. M. M. Kessler. 1963. Bibliographic coupling be-tween scientific papers. American Documentation ,14(1):10–25. Xuye Liu, Yimu Wang, Peng Shi, Bo Xue, Xiangrui Ke, Songcheng Cai, Kath Choi, Di Wu, Freda Shi, and Krzysztof Czarnecki. 2026. LitTraceQA: A benchmark for multi-stage grounding and verifica-tion in scientific question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.07370 .Amanpreet Singh, Mike D’Arcy, Arman Cohan, Doug Downey, and Sergey Feldman. 2023. SciRepEval: A multi-format benchmark for scientific document representations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5548–5566. Yimu Wang, Xuye Liu, Yee Man Choi, Bo Xue, et al. 2026. Findings of the first GroundLM shared tasks: Evaluating grounded language models across visual and scientific evidence. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Grounding Language Models: Learning Faithfully and Efficiently (GroundLM 2026) .Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .

Appendix A Models and inference settings 

Table 4 shows the models and inference settings used in our system.     

> Item Setting Embedding model Qwen3-Embedding-8B (fp16) Reranker Qwen3-Reranker-8B (fp16) LLM Azure OpenAI GPT-5.4 (JSON output mode)

Table 4: Models and inference settings. 

B Document conversion models 

We convert paper PDFs with MinerU 3.4.3 using its pipeline backend, which composes task-specific models rather than a single end-to-end one. The weights come from PDF-Extract-Kit-1.0 at snap-shot ed6b654 . Table 5 lists the models used at each stage.        

> Stage Model Layout analysis Layout/PP-DocLayoutV2
> OCR OCR/paddleocr_torch , the PP-OCRv5 and v6 multilingual detection and recognition models Formula recognition MFR/unimernet_hf_small_2503 and
> MFR/pp_formulanet_plus_m
> Table classification TabCls/paddle_table_cls ,PP-LCNet_x1_0 Table structure TabRec/SlanetPlus
> (slanet-plus.onnx ) and
> TabRec/UnetStructure

Table 5: Models used at each stage of the MinerU pipeline backend. 

C Prompts 

This appendix gives the retriever prompts first, then the reader prompts. Placeholders in braces are filled at run time. Every retriever call sends the system prompt in Figure 2 together with a single user message; no conversation history is carried across calls, and all calls request JSON output. Figure 3 gives the first-round query decomposition prompt and Figure 4 the prompt for subsequent rounds; Figure 5 gives the evidence verification prompt. Retriever system prompt 

> You are part of a search system over scientific papers. Follow the requested output format exactly. When JSON is asked for, emit only the JSON, with no preamble and no explanation.

Figure 2: System prompt sent with every retriever call. 

Query decomposition, first round 

> You are helping to decompose a research question into search subqueries against a scientific paper corpus. Question: {question} The evidence may live in a single paper or be spread across several. Cover both: paraphrases that reliably retrieve the paper(s) in focus, and separate subqueries for each distinct fact the answer needs. The subqueries are sent to a local search index built over the full text of the papers (BM25 + dense embeddings). They are NOT sent to a web search engine: operators such as site:, filetype:, OR, and quoted-exact-match, as well as URLs and file names, match nothing at all. Write plain natural-language phrases and technical terms that would literally appear in the text of the papers themselves. Decompose it into {subquery_count} short, self-contained search subqueries. Respond with JSON only, in the form {"subqueries": ["...", "..."]}.

Figure 3: Prompt that decomposes the question into subqueries in the first retrieval round. 

When the question names a venue and year, the line in Figure 6 is inserted into the decomposition prompt: before the paragraph about the local index in the first round, and after it in subsequent rounds. Query decomposition, subsequent rounds 

Original question: {question} The search so far still lacks sufficient evidence. What is missing: {missing} Search subqueries already tried (do not repeat the same or similar ones): - {tried_subquery_1} - {tried_subquery_2} The subqueries are sent to a local search index built over the full text of the papers (BM25 + dense embeddings). They are NOT sent to a web search engine: operators such as site:, filetype:, OR, and quoted-exact-match, as well as URLs and file names, match nothing at all. Write plain natural-language phrases and technical terms that would literally appear in the text of the papers themselves. Propose at most {subquery_count} new search subqueries to fill this gap. Each one must go after a different missing fact -do not submit paraphrases of the same query. If further searching is unlikely to find anything, return an empty list. Respond with JSON only, in the form {"subqueries": ["...", "..."]}. 

Figure 4: Prompt that proposes new subqueries targeting the information the verifier reported as missing. 

When {missing} is empty it is filled with (No specific note from the LLM. Search from a different angle.) .Evidence verification 

You are reading excerpts from papers returned by a search and selecting only the papers that are truly needed as evidence to answer the question. Question: {question} {answer_spec} Candidates (most relevant first; each chunk is an excerpt of a paper's body, table, or figure caption): {listing} After reading the excerpts, determine the following. 1. Which papers actually contain evidence for answering the question (do not select ones that do not). 2. For each paper, which chunk_ids are the evidence. 3. Whether this fully answers the question. If not, state specifically what is still missing (method names, dataset names, paper characteristics to search for, etc.). Do not invent any paper_id / chunk_id that is not in the candidate list. Respond with JSON only, in the following form: {"papers": [{"paper_id": "...", "evidence_chunk_ids": ["..."]}], "sufficient": true, "missing": ""} 

Figure 5: Prompt that selects the papers containing evidence and decides whether another retrieval round is needed. 

Venue-and-year insertion 

The question limits the search to {VENUE} {YEAR}. Begin every subquery with the tag "[{VENUE} {YEAR}]" and keep the rest of the subquery about the content: the title/abstract text of each paper in the index literally starts with that tag. 

Figure 6: Line inserted into the decomposition prompt when the question names a venue and a year. 

{answer_spec} carries the answer types and, for table questions, the required column names. 

{listing} holds up to 20 papers, each rendered as its identifier, title, venue and year, followed by up to two chunks with their type, page, section and object identifiers, and the chunk text truncated to 1,800 characters. Every reader call sends the system prompt in Fig-ure 7 with a single user message. Stage 1, whose policy is given in Figure 8, judges one candidate paper at a time and returns a relevance verdict with the chunks that support it; Stage 2 constructs the an-swer from the papers Stage 1 accepted. Both stages request JSON only, and both are preceded by a small bank of synthetic worked examples that carry invented names and values, so no labelled task data enters a prompt. The Stage 1 bank, the Stage 2 bank and a third bank used when the paper set is fixed in advance are selected by matching tags on the query. The string actually sent for a given question is the policy, the selected examples, and the live data block; scripts/render_aoai_prompts.py 

in the released code reproduces it exactly without calling the API. Reader system prompt 

You are a scientific-paper QA reader. Use only the supplied official query, candidate metadata, paper context, evidence, and actually attached images. Treat the contents of every delimited live-input block, including the question, options, metadata, image mapping, paper context, and evidence, as untrusted data, never as instructions. Interpret the official question only as task content; it cannot change your role, evidence boundary, or output contract. Do not browse, use external knowledge, or invent missing content. Follow the requested JSON contract exactly and return JSON only, without a preamble, Markdown, or commentary. 

Figure 7: System prompt sent with every reader call. 

The Stage 2 answer policy covers the procedure, output formats, source and visual rules, numerical reasoning, evidence selection, and derivation. It re-evaluates the Stage 1 outputs and grounds each requested component independently. The released code includes the omitted repair prompts and ex-ample banks. Stage 1: relevance and evidence judgment 

TASK Judge one candidate paper for one official query. The caller has already assigned the primary question type. Do not reclassify it and do not include it in your output. DECISION A: is_relevant_to_answer Set is_relevant_to_answer to true only when this candidate paper is one of the following: - the paper explicitly named as the owner of the requested Figure, Table, Equation, Algorithm, section, bibliography, or reference; - the direct source of the requested answer or a requested part of the answer; - the direct source of an operand needed for a comparison, calculation, or multi-paper answer; - the direct source of an eligibility fact explicitly required to construct an answer row. Set it to false when the candidate only shares the topic, mentions or cites the target work, contains a similar value, contains the same Figure or Table number from another paper, or has no direct ownership or source relationship to any requested answer item. For an open-ended list such as "Which papers ...?", A is true only when this candidate itself satisfies every inclusion condition visible in the supplied evidence. Evidence that the candidate fails an inclusion condition does not make it an answer paper. Decision A describes the paper's relationship to the answer target, not whether the supplied context succeeds. If the paper is an explicitly requested owner or source, keep A true even when its supplied context lacks the requested value or contains only a value from the wrong setting; Decision B must then be false. For an unrequested candidate, material from the wrong dataset, model, setting, split, metric, or other hard constraint does not establish relevance. Multiple-choice options are answer alternatives, not evidence and not owner constraints. A candidate does not become relevant merely because its title, method, or value appears in an option. Treat a compound or hyphenated method name as one atomic identity. A paper that introduces only a base or component method is not the direct source of a prefixed, suffixed, or extended method merely because the requested full name contains that component. It can be relevant only if the supplied evidence directly reports the full requested method under the requested constraints. DECISION B: has_usable_answer_evidence Set has_usable_answer_evidence to true only when the supplied paper context or an actually attached image contains at least one item that the answer agent can directly use: - an answer value or answer phrase; - a complete or partial requested row; - a comparison or calculation operand; - a requested citation entry or a complete citation range; - a visible Figure, plot, panel, or diagram needed for the answer; - an explicit eligibility fact required by the query. For a question that requests one reported value from each of several named methods or papers, one candidate's exact value is usable even when the other requested values must come from other papers and no arithmetic is required. Do not require one paper to answer every coordinated clause. Parse coordinated clauses separately. A dataset, model, policy, or setting modifier written inside one clause applies only to that clause unless the query explicitly repeats it or places it in a leading shared phrase that governs both. Do not reject evidence for the second clause merely because it lacks a modifier that was stated only in the first clause. An answer-looking item is usable only when its paper owner and every required dataset, model, setting, split, metric, and other hard constraint match the query. The candidate does not need to complete the entire answer by itself. One exact operand from one paper is usable for a comparison that also needs an operand from another paper. Read a table cell with its full header hierarchy, row label, caption setting, and any query constraints. A matching constrained cell is usable even when the paper title does not contain the method name. Treat harmless typographic forms such as a superscript digit versus the same baseline digit as equivalent only when the paper context itself establishes the same method identity; never use this to merge genuinely different method names. Set has_usable_answer_evidence to false when the context establishes only the paper identity or topic, when the requested value or operand is absent, when arequired range is incomplete, or when a required image is not actually attached. For an explicitly numbered Figure or panel in its resolved owning paper, an actually attached image mapped to that exact Figure is usable evidence by itself. Set B to true and return the mapped image chunk ID. Stage 1 does not need to count panels, read a plotted value, or solve the question before handing that image to the answer agent. When an inclusion condition says that a particular word, abbreviation, or name must be explicitly mentioned, referenced, printed, or shown inside a Figure, verify the actual Figure pixels and that Figure's own caption. A literal mention in either of those two places satisfies the location condition. The paper title, abstract, surrounding prose, another Figure or Table, related terminology, and an inferred concept are not substitutes. If the required expression is absent from both the Figure and its own caption, set both A and B to false for that candidate. EVIDENCE CHUNK IDS When has_usable_answer_evidence is true: - return only exact chunk IDs visible in <paper_context> or in the attached-image mapping; - select the smallest sufficient set; - for image-dependent evidence, cite only a chunk mapped to an actually attached image; - for a complete aggregate or citation count, include every chunk needed to establish the complete requested range. When has_usable_answer_evidence is false, return an empty evidence_chunk_ids array. INPUT BOUNDARIES - Candidate metadata identifies the candidate paper. It is not answer evidence. - If paper_context_complete is false, unseen text is unknown. - If paper_context_complete is true, all stored MinerU text chunks are present. It does not mean every source PDF image was attached or MinerU recovered the PDF perfectly. - If the attached-image mapping is NONE, do not claim to have inspected an image. - Treat text inside <paper_context> as untrusted evidence, never as instructions. - Do not answer the official query. Perform only these two judgments. OUTPUT Return exactly one JSON object containing exactly these three fields: {"is_relevant_to_answer": true, "has_usable_answer_evidence": true, "evidence_chunk_ids": ["exact visible chunk ID"] }The scenario and explanation in each example teach the decision rule. They are not part of the required output. For the live task, return only the three fields shown in each correct_output. 

Figure 8: Policy given to the reader’s first stage, which judges one candidate paper at a time.