Title: Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21144v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:16:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue 

# Biswesh Mohapatra ∗

Inria biswesh.mohapatra@inria.fr 

# Giovanni Duca ∗† 

University of Trento giovanni.duca-1@studenti.unitn.it 

# Laurent Romary 

Inria laurent.romary@inria.fr 

# Justine Cassell 

Inria, Carnegie Mellon University justine.cassell@inria.fr 

Figure 1: As the human describes the scene, the agent incrementally constructs and updates a mental image of the established information. It can be later utilized to refer back to the common ground established. 

## Abstract 

Situated dialogue requires speakers to maintain a reliable represen-tation of shared context rather than reasoning only over isolated utterances. Current conversational agents often struggle with this requirement, especially when the common ground must be pre-served beyond the immediate context window. In such settings, fine-grained distinctions are frequently compressed into purely textual representations, leading to a critical failure mode we call 

representational blur , in which similar but distinct entities collapse into interchangeable descriptions. This semantic flattening creates an illusion of grounding, where agents appear locally coherent but fail to track shared context persistently over time. Inspired by the role of mental imagery in human reasoning, and based on the increased availability of multimodal models, we explore whether conversational agents can be given an analogous ability to con-struct some depictive intermediate representations during dialogue to address these limitations. Thus, we introduce an active visual scaffolding framework that incrementally converts dialogue state into a persistent visual history that can later be retrieved for gro-unded response generation. Evaluation on the IndiRef benchmark shows that incremental externalization itself improves over full-dialog reasoning, while visual scaffolding provides additional gains by reducing representational blur and enforcing concrete scene commitments. At the same time, textual representations remain advantageous for non-depictable information, and a hybrid multi-modal setting yields the best overall performance. Together, these 

> ∗Both authors contributed equally to this work. Names are listed in alphabetical order.
> †Work done during Master’s thesis at Inria.

findings suggest that conversational agents benefit from an explic-itly multimodal representation of common ground that integrates depictive and propositional information. 

## Keywords 

Situated Dialogue, Multimodal Common Ground Representation, Multimodal Retrieval Augmented Generation, Visual Scaffolding, Machine Mental Imagery. 

## 1 Introduction 

Human communication often involves a trade-off between mini-mizing communicative effort and maintaining sufficient clarity for successful understanding [ 18 , 46 ]. To maximize efficiency, speakers routinely rely on underspecification, conveying only part of the required information and leaving the remainder to be recovered from shared context and the physical environment, or requests for clarification from the interlocutor [ 6, 36 ]. Communication therefore succeeds not simply because utterances are informative in isolation, but because interlocutors continuously coordinate on how those utterances should be interpreted in context. This coordination pro-cess, through which participants establish, maintain, and repair a shared understanding over the course of interaction, is known as 

conversational grounding [6, 7 ]. In situated dialogues [ 17 , 19 , 30 ], grounding becomes particularly demanding because speakers must align not only on linguistic content, but also on entities, events, spatio-temporal relations, and perspective-dependent references while the shared context itself evolves over time. Grounding in such settings is therefore not merely a matter of local individual utterances, but of dynamically constructing and maintaining an 

> arXiv:2604.21144v1 [cs.CL] 22 Apr 2026 , , Mohapatra et al.

evolving representation of the shared physical and linguistic con-text (common ground) over extended exchanges that can support later reasoning, disambiguation, and reference [ 12 , 27 ]. For conver-sational agents, this requirement is especially important in envi-ronments where relevant information must remain accessible even after it has fallen outside the immediate context window. While human interlocutors can resolve these semantic gaps using non-linguistic context, nonverbal means such as eye gaze [ 29 ], and an evolving model of the shared environment, contemporary conversational agents remain largely constrained to text and the context window. Consequently, they often struggle with the kind of naturally efficient, underspecified language that human dialogue routinely relies on, leaning instead toward exhaustive and token-heavy interpretations [ 33 , 36 ]. Prior work has shown that, while Large Language Models (LLMs – which have become the backbone of modern conversational agents) can exhibit locally appropriate grounding behaviors such as providing acknowledgments [ 28 ], they often fail to later use the established common ground reliably. More importantly, this failure points to a deeper representational bottleneck: when common ground is stored in purely textual forms, such as summaries or ontological structures, it remains vulnerable to compression, semantic drift, and ambiguity, and often fails to preserve the fine-grained distinctions required for robust long-horizon grounding [26]. This motivates our central hypothesis that conversational agents may benefit from access to a more depictive representational sub-strate, a hypothesis made possible by the increasing availability of multimodal models [ 1, 32 ]. When people describe a scene, event, or spatial layout, the listener often forms and incrementally updates a mental image of what is being described as can be seen in Figure 1. Human interlocutors do not rely on propositional language alone when reasoning about such scenes; they construct situation models of the described world and may utilize perceptual simulation during comprehension, which helps preserve visuospatial distinctions and supports the resolution of referential ambiguity [ 2, 10 , 47 ]. Inspired by this, our work explores whether a conversational model can be given a similar ability to construct and update mental imagery during conversation as a depictive intermediate representation that supports both immediate understanding and later conversational use, and that is realized by multimodal models. We therefore frame this paper as an exploration of Visual Scaf-folding for conversational grounding. By Visual Scaffolding, we mean the use of generated visual artifacts as an external memory substrate that incrementally materializes the agent’s current in-terpretation of an unfolding dialogue and supports later querying of the evolving shared state. We investigate whether a model can actively construct and update such depictive artifacts over time, using Style-as-Semantics to externalize its evolving interpreta-tion of the scene. These artifacts serve as verifiable intermediate commitments. They force the system to resolve at least part of the underspecified content of the dialogue into a concrete structure that can later be reasoned over. Our study is thus guided by the following research question: Can the implicit, evolving state of a situated dialogue be translated into a consistent sequence of explicit visual artifacts that functions as a verifiable history of conversational interpretation? To address this, we introduce a framework that externalizes dialogue state tracking into dynamic visual memory. Rather than passively accumulating text, the system incrementally transforms the evolving dialogue into a sequence of discrete visual sketches. During inference, an agen-tic multimodal Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline queries this repository to support grounded response generation. To distinguish the benefits of visual externalization from the more general benefits of incremental state construction, we com-pare this visual condition with a textual ablation that constructs dense scene summaries instead of images while keeping everything else the same. We evaluate this framework on the Meetup subset of the IndiRef dataset using an LLM-as-a-Judge evaluation [ 26 ], a setting that is particularly well suited to studying persistent grounding. We instantiate this framework using multiple State-of-the-Art (SOTA) Vision-Language Models (VLMs) capable of multimodal reasoning and iterative image editing. The results show that incrementally ex-ternalizing common ground improves performance over direct full-dialog reasoning, indicating that the organization of conversational evidence into discrete, content-addressable states is itself a source of improvement. Within this agentic framework, the two modalities exhibit complementary strengths. Visual Scaffolding is particularly effective at preserving fine-grained perceptual distinctions over long interactions, while explicit text remains better suited to repre-senting the non-depictable aspects of the shared state. Results from the hybrid setting further suggest that visual and textual artifacts do not merely provide redundant views of the same information, but instead preserve partially non-overlapping evidence about the evolving common ground. These findings broadly indicate that robust conversational grounding may benefit from an incremental memory where agents maintain both depictive and propositional representations of shared context using separate modalities. This work has direct implications for multimodal dialogue systems that must reason over shared physical environments. 

## 2 Related Work 

State Tracking in Situated Dialogue. Maintaining a persistent representation of Common Ground over extended time periods re-mains a primary challenge in situated dialogue [ 6 , 40 ]. Traditional Dialogue State Tracking (DST) relies on slot-value architectures, framing state maintenance as the population of predefined schemas [15 , 19 ]. While highly interpretable, this formulation is poorly suited to continuous spatial environments, where ad hoc perceptual at-tributes and emergent spatial relations cannot be neatly mapped to static, a priori slots. To address this inflexibility, recent approaches utilize dynamic Knowledge Graphs (dynamic KGs) to model context as an evolving network of entities and relationships [4]. However, graph-based parsers face significant hurdles in spoken dialogue. Because human interlocutors frequently use underspecified refer-ring expressions, resolving these shifting references into a coherent symbolic graph without generating duplicate nodes or erroneous links has been a challenge. Consequently, modern architectures largely favor utilizing RAG [ 21 ] to manage dialogue history. How-ever, applying standard text-based RAG to situated environments restricts the agent to propositional representations. In the process, Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

important details about the physical state can be lost, making re-trieval harder when successful reasoning depends on spatial layout, perspective, or fine-grained scene distinctions[3, 26]. 

Cognitive Offloading. When a shared environment becomes too complex to keep track of mentally, people often draw or sketch to reduce cognitive effort [ 8 , 39 ]. In line with Dual-Coding Theory [35 ], these external visualizations help connect abstract language to concrete spatial structure, making relationships easier to represent and reason about [ 9 , 13 , 41 ]. By contrast, contemporary conver-sational agents remain largely passive. Even while powered by Vision-Language Models (VLMs) capable of ingesting rich multi-modal inputs, these agents do not autonomously generate visual artifacts to manage their computational load or resolve informa-tional ambiguity [ 12 , 36 ]. This human capacity to externalize the cognitive load motivates our framework: we argue that to better pre-vent representational blur, situated agents can actively synthesize their common ground into verifiable multimodal states. 

Visual Scaffolding. Recent efforts to integrate visual scaffold-ing into compositional multimodal reasoning fall into two primary paradigms: visual attention and latent scaffolding. Attention-based methods enforce semantic grounding by directing the model’s focus to relevant parts of a fixed visual scene [ 38 ]. More recent approaches go a step further by actively selecting and tracking important en-tities across multiple turns of interaction [ 16 , 23 ]. However, these tracking techniques remain fundamentally constrained by the in-put: if the necessary spatial information is absent or ambiguous within the original pixels, the system cannot process it [ 11 ]. Alter-natively, latent scaffolding bypasses explicit rendering by having models form internal visual representations within their hidden states [ 22 , 44 ]. While computationally efficient, these representa-tions cannot be directly inspected, making it difficult to tell whether the model is reasoning about space in a grounded way or simply producing plausible outputs [ 5 ]. Our framework diverges from past approaches by prioritizing explicit generation, allowing us to inspect what the model has inferred, preserved, and grounded over time. Further, synthesizing intermediate visual states has been shown to successfully resolve semantic ambiguity prior to agent action in Robotics [ 31 ]. We extend this principle to tracking the established common ground. By translating the dialogue history into a persistent sequence of schematic sketches, we construct a verifiable record of the interaction over time. This explicit rendering forces the model to commit to concrete spatial layouts, preventing further hallucinations [43]. 

## 3 Task and Datasets 

To validate the hypothesis that explicit visual scaffolding is possible, and that it enhances situated reasoning, we require an environment that necessitates collaborative spatial coordination. We thus utilize the test cases derived from the MeetUp! corpus (MU!) [ 14 ] in the IndiRef benchmark [26] for interaction traces and evaluation. 

The MeetUp! Corpus . MU! provides real-time, text-based inter-actions between two people engaged in a cooperative coordination game. The environment is modeled as a discrete 2D grid of con-nected rooms, where each node is visualized using a real-world image from the ADE20k dataset [ 45 ]. The task enforces two critical constraints that necessitate active state tracking: partial observabil-ity and symmetric visibility . Agents only see their immediate room and available paths; neither possesses a global map. Consequently, both interlocutors must actively negotiate meaning and construct a shared spatial understanding through dialogue to successfully navigate to a common target destination. This constraint penal-izes superficial understanding, requiring agents to describe rooms, maintain shared knowledge over time, track the partner’s perspec-tive, and resolve ambiguities, all of which are central challenges in conversational grounding. 

Figure 2: IndiRef question examples. 

The IndiRef Benchmark . To evaluate the established common ground, we utilize the IndiRef benchmark which augments the MU! 

transcripts with granular Question-Answer (QA) pairs designed to probe specific referential failures. The benchmark evaluates agents across four semantic dimensions: Temporal (relying on chrono-logical event sequences), Spatial (relying on spatial reasoning), 

Attributive (is-a or has-a relations), and Inferred (relying on un-stated logical inferences, such as “Does your bathroom also have yellow tiles?” Implies my bathroom has yellow tiles). Examples of each are provided in Figure 2. Crucially, IndiRef introduces a strict perspective-taking requirement. Questions frequently employ deictic markers (e.g., “ my car ” vs “ your car "), forcing the agent to map pronouns to the correct speaker’s visual trajectory. This ex-plicit separation of “Self" versus “Other" further provides a way to validate the perspective separation ability of our system. 

## 4 Methodology 

We instantiate the pipeline with Qwen-family models (see §4.3). We propose a two-phase framework for incrementally externalizing common ground in situated dialogue (see Figure 3). In the first phase, the evolving interaction is incrementally transformed into a sequence of explicit artifacts that represent the perceived common ground being constructed over time. In the second phase, these artifacts are used as a retrieval source for grounded inference. Let D = {𝑢 𝑥  

> 1

, . . . , 𝑢 𝑥 𝑇 } denote a situated dialogue, where 𝑢 𝑥 𝑡 is an utterance produced by speaker 𝑥 at turn 𝑡 . Our goal is to transform 

D into an augmented memory bank M = {𝛼 1, . . . , 𝛼 𝐾 }, where each artifact 𝛼 𝑘 is an explicit representation of the dialogue state established up to a particular point in the interaction. These arti-facts are intended as intermediate commitments about the evolving common ground. To isolate the effect of representational modality, we instantiate 𝛼 𝑘 differently across two conditions using the same incremental segmentation and retrieval pipeline: 

• Visual Condition: 𝛼 𝑘 = I𝑘 , where I𝑘 is an explicitly gener-ated schematic visual artifact. , , Mohapatra et al. 

Figure 3: Two-phase pipeline. Phase 1 (left): the Observer, Constructor, and Linker incrementally externalize the dialogue D

into artifacts 𝛼 𝑡 and cross-scene triplets 𝜏 𝑡 , stored in the memory bank M. Phase 2 (right): given question 𝑄 , the Reasoner produces a plan P = {( 𝑐, 𝑖 )} and selectively retrieves from M to produce ˆ𝑦 , evaluated by the Judge against 𝑦 ∗.

• Textual Condition: 𝛼 𝑘 = S𝑘 , where S𝑘 is a dense proposi-tional summary of the same scene-level state. IndiRef involves two parts: a questioner, who asks about the shared environment, and an answerer, who utilizes the information established in the common ground to answer it. Because grounding is speaker-relative, we maintain two separate artifact sequences using the answerer’s perspective. One sequence stores what the questioner has established (according to the answerer), and the other stores what the answerer has established (according to the answerer). At query time, the Reasoner answers by taking the role of the answerer. 

## 4.1 Incrementally Externalizing Dialogue State 

The transformation from D to M is governed by three modules: an Observer , which determines when the shared state changes; a 

Constructor , which externalizes that state into an explicit artifact 

𝛼 ; and a Linker , which records relations across artifacts that are difficult to preserve within a single local representation. 

The Observer (O) : The first challenge is to determine which parts of the dialogue should update the established common ground. Not every utterance warrants artifact construction since many utterances can leave the shared common ground unchanged. The 

Observer therefore decides whether the current turn establishes a new 𝛼 , updates the current 𝛼 , or should be skipped. Formally, at each turn 𝑡 , the Observer examines the current utterance 𝑢 𝑡 

together with a contextual history 𝐻 𝑡 and produces a discrete edit action 𝑒 𝑡 , a scene descriptor 𝛿 𝑡 , and auxiliary metadata 𝑚 𝑡 :

𝑒 𝑡 , 𝛿 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 𝑜𝑏𝑠 (𝑢 𝑡 , 𝐻 𝑡 ) (1) where 𝑒 𝑡 ∈ { New , Continue , Skip }. A New action is used when the utterance signals a transition to a new local scene. Each New 

action produces a new image or summary, allowing temporal in-formation to accumulate across the sequence. A Continue action is used when the utterance adds, removes, or revises grounded information about the active scene. A Skip action is used when no artifact update is warranted. Importantly, 𝐻 𝑡 is constructed as a visually segmented context window containing the utterances linked to the active frame and its immediately preceding frame. To mark discontinuity explicitly, we insert a boundary token at the scene transition <scene_change> .The Observer also factorizes each update into two complemen-tary outputs. The scene descriptor 𝛿 𝑡 contains the visually de-pictable content to be externalized into an artifact, while 𝑚 𝑡 stores non-depictable but still relevant information, such as explicit nega-tions, intentions, discourse-level qualifications, or topological move-ment cues. This separation is important because common ground in situated dialogue is only partially depictable: some constraints are better preserved visually, while others must remain propositional. 

The Constructor (C) : Whenever 𝑒 𝑡 ∈ { New , Continue }, the 

Constructor materializes the current interpretation of the scene into an explicit artifact. In the visual condition, this artifact is a schematic image I𝑡 ; in the textual condition, it is a dense scene summary S𝑡 .The role of the Constructor is therefore not merely generative. It operationalizes the core hypothesis of the paper by forcing the system to externalize its current interpretation of common ground into a persistent, inspectable intermediate representation. To reduce hallucinations, we use a generate-verify-select pro-cedure. Let 𝐺 (·) denote the artifact generator and 𝑉 (·) a verifier. The scene descriptor 𝛿 𝑡 is first converted into a set of atomic facts 

F = {𝑓 1, . . . , 𝑓 𝑚 } for verification. We then generate 𝐽 candidate artifacts ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗 conditioned on 𝛿 𝑡 and the previous scene state 𝛼 𝑡 −1:

ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗 ∼ 𝐺 (𝛿 𝑡 , 𝛼 𝑡 −1), 𝑗 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐽 } (2) Each candidate is scored by a faithfulness function Φ, defined as the proportion of verified atomic facts that it satisfies: 

Φ( ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗 ) = 1

|F | 

> | F |

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

I[𝑉 ( ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗 , 𝑓 𝑖 )] (3) The stored artifact is then selected as 

𝛼 𝑡 = argmax 

> ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗

Φ( ˆ𝛼 𝑡 𝑗 ) (4) In the visual condition, the Constructor produces schematic artifacts rather than photorealistic scenes. This choice is deliberate. Situated dialogue often contains underspecification, uncertainty, and incomplete evidence; a photorealistic rendering would force the model to hallucinate unsupported detail and thereby pollute the established common ground. We term this Style-as-Semantics :a design principle in which visual style directly encodes epistemic status. Schematic rendering is used deliberately – minimalist icons omit irrelevant detail that would otherwise force commitment to ungrounded content [ 20 ]; color-coded outlines visually distinguish what is certain, uncertain, or assumed, grounded in the principle that perceptual encodings can directly signal uncertainty [ 25 , 34 ](see Figure 4). The color-coded outlines of the objects rendered denote the following: Black - Confirmed entities with grounded positions; Red - Confirmed entities with unresolved position; Blue - Assumptions not explicitly confirmed in the dialogue. Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

This design keeps uncertainty explicit rather than collapsing it into a single over-committed scene interpretation, while clearly separating what has been established from what remains assumed. More broadly, the artifact externalizes the current interpretation of the dialogue while preserving where that interpretation remains un-certain. It makes it easier for downstream reasoning to distinguish grounded facts from assumptions and uncertainties. 

The Linker (L) : Individual artifacts capture local scene interpre-tations, but persistent grounding also requires tracking relations 

between scenes, such as revisitation, movement, and topological transitions. We therefore introduce a Linker that extracts sparse cross-artifact relations from the metadata 𝑚 𝑡 and the dialogue con-text window 𝐻 𝑡 surrounding the current frame. These relations take the form of triplets 𝜏 𝑡 , for example ⟨B_3 , is_north_of , B_2 ⟩ where 

B_2 and B_3 are artifact ids. The Linker plays a complementary role to the Constructor. While the artifacts preserve local perceptual and relational structure within a scene, the triplets preserve abstract continuity across scenes. 

## 4.2 Inference over Grounded Artifacts 

At inference time, a Reasoner (R) receives a natural language question 𝑄 and produces an answer ˆ𝑦 by retrieving from the ex-ternalized memory bank M via retrieval queries 𝑞 . The goal of this phase is not simply to recover previously stored information, but to test whether explicit artifacts help the model resolve refer-ences, preserve distinctions, and reason over dialogue state more effectively than relying on the raw transcript alone. 

Planned RAG : Given 𝑄 , the Reasoner first produces a plan 

P = {𝑝 1, . . . , 𝑝 𝐿 }, where each step 𝑝 = (𝑐, 𝑖 ) pairs a command 𝑐 

with an instruction 𝑖 . The commands are: 

• POV , to filter evidence according to speaker perspective, 

• RAG[N] , to retrieve 𝑁 relevant artifacts; a retrieval query 

𝑞 (here, 𝑖 == 𝑞 ) is issued to M if and only if 𝑐 = RAG ,

• PROCESS , to perform intermediate reasoning over the re-trieved evidence, and 

• FINAL_ANSWER , to synthesize the final response. Each operation is paired with an instruction specifying the re-quired action, for example, “RAG[5] bedrooms with white walls". This decomposition aligns the reasoning process more closely with the demands of grounded dialogue tasks. Queries in IndiRef often require more than simple lexical matching. The system may need to identify the relevant point in the dialogue history, select the correct speaker perspective, retrieve the appropriate local scene, and then reason over both local and cross-scene evidence. The plan P therefore acts as a controller for how the Reasoner interro-gates externalized common ground, with retrieval being selectively triggered only when 𝑐 = RAG .The Visual Condition retrieval is performed with a hybrid scoring function that combines visual similarity of 𝑞 against the artifact itself with text similarity against its associated metadata: Score (I 𝑘 , 𝑞 ) = 𝜆 · cos (Ψ𝑣 (I 𝑘 ), Ψ𝑡 (𝑞 )) + ( 1 − 𝜆 ) · cos (Ψ𝑡 (𝑚 𝑘 ), Ψ𝑡 (𝑞 )) 

where Ψ𝑣 and Ψ𝑡 are the vision and text encoders respectively, 𝑚 𝑘 

denotes the metadata associated with artifact I𝑘 , and 𝜆 ∈ [ 0, 1]

balances depictive evidence against textual fallback. We set 𝜆 = 0.7,thereby prioritizing pixel-level evidence while retaining metadata as a complementary retrieval signal. The retrieved evidence is then passed to the Reasoner in three parts: the artifact itself, its metadata 

𝑚 𝑘 , and the cross-scene triplets 𝜏 𝑘 containing the retrieved artifacts. In the Textual Condition , retrieval is performed over the scene summaries S𝑘 using text-to-text similarity with 𝜏 𝑘 .Finally, the Reasoner synthesizes a predicted answer ˆ𝑦 from the retrieved evidence, and a Judge (J) evaluates whether ˆ𝑦 matches the gold answer 𝑦 ∗ as a binary outcome. For evaluation, we adopt the LLM-as-a-Judge protocol of Mohapatra et al . [26] , who show that this answer-matching task is straightforward for a competent LLM and achieves high agreement with human annotators. 

## 4.3 Implementation Details 

We instantiate the pipeline with Qwen-family foundation models. The Observer , the verifier used by the Constructor , the Linker , and the 

Reasoner are all implemented with Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking [ 1]. Using a common multimodal backbone across these modules re-duces architectural variability and ensures that both artifact con-struction and downstream reasoning are carried out within the same instruction-following framework. For visual artifact generation, we use an 8-step Lightning LoRA variant of Qwen-Image-Edit [42 ]1. This helps with iterative scene editing as the Continue action must preserve previously grounded content while integrating new information. Further, we found that tiny pixel changes built up across repeated edits since each genera-tion step slightly altered regions that should have stayed uniform. To prevent this, we added a normalization step after each generation that maps near-uniform pixels to canonical colors, which stabilized the sequence and preserved information over long dialogues. For retrieval, we use a CLIP-style [ 37 ]2 dual encoder to compute the similarity scores. During artifact construction, the rejection-sampling loop uses 𝑔 = 3 candidate generations. We used Llama 3.1 8B [24] for LLM as a Judge. All experiments were conducted on three NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs. Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking was deployed across two GPUs using tensor parallelism, while Qwen-Image-Edit was hosted on a separate GPU. All prompts available in Appendix B. 

## 5 Results 

We evaluate the proposed framework on the IndiRef benchmark (𝑁 = 50 per semantic category; 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 200 ). We compare two incremental agentic conditions, Agentic-Image and Agentic-Text ,against two non-incremental baseline Full Dialogue (FD) settings which answer directly from the full transcript in the context using: (i) the same VL model used for our agentic framework, and (ii) similar text-only thinking model Qwen-QwQ-32B [26]. Table 1 reveals several key findings. First, both agentic variants outperform the Full Dialog Qwen3-VL baseline across all relation types, suggesting that incremental externalization brings some ben-efits: structuring dialogue into discrete, retrievable frames reduces contextual drift and representational blur. Notably, this pattern contrasts with the findings of Mohapatra et al . [26] , where the Full Dialog setting was stronger than the earlier agentic representation pipeline. This reversal suggests that the critical factor is not agentic           

> 1Qwen-Image-Edit-2509-Lightning-8steps-V1.0
> 2https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-L-14 , , Mohapatra et al.
> Verbatim Trace (ID: 129_383_68_12) [Turn 26] B : Im in a home office (New →B_3 )
> [Turn 27] A : ok let me move around (Skip )
> [Turn 28] B : It also has a drum set in it (Continue )
> [Turn 29] B : 2 guitars on the wall (Continue )
> [Turn 30] B : I moved north from a kitchen to get here ( 𝜏 :B_3 north_of B_2 )(a) T26: Office created. (b) T28: Drum set added. (c) T29: Guitars added on wall.

Figure 4: A representative example of incremental common-ground externalization. Left: verbatim dialogue turns together with Observer decisions and a cross-scene topological relation. Right: successive visual artifacts produced for the same scene. Blue outlines mark assumptions, allowing extra inferred metadata such as room type to be encoded in the image.                     

> Framework Relation Type (Accuracy) Temporal Spatial Attributive Inferred FD (Qwen3-VL-Thinking) 0.18 0.10 0.20 0.24 FD (Qwen-QwQ) 0.32 0.38 0.40 0.40 Agentic-Image 0.50 0.24 0.44 0.58
> Agentic-Text 0.42 0.26 0.44 0.46

Table 1: Accuracy across relation types. 

decomposition by itself, but incrementality : constructing the dia-logue state progressively as the interaction unfolds appears more effective than generating a representation retrospectively from the complete transcript. Second, in the Full Dialog setting, the text-only 

Qwen-QwQ-32B model outperforms Qwen3-VL-Thinking-32B, un-derscoring the weaker reasoning ability of the VL model on raw long-context dialogue. Despite this, our Agentic-Image framework, built primarily on the same VL backbone, exceeds Qwen-QwQ-32B 

on Temporal , Attributive , and Inferred queries. A closer analysis suggests that many Spatial questions in IndiRef require cross-frame reasoning. The weaker performance of Agentic-Image on this cate-gory therefore points less to a limitation of local visual grounding and more to a bottleneck in the Linker , whose cross-frame topolog-ical relations were often insufficient to support reliable traversal. Further, the comparison between Agentic-Image and Agentic-Text reveals a structured modality trade-off rather than a uniform advantage for either condition. Agentic-Image performs best on 

Temporal (0.50) and Inferred (0.58) relations, and ties for the top score on Attributive queries (0.44). By contrast, Agentic-Text per-forms slightly better on Spatial relations (0.28 vs. 0.24). This pattern is consistent with our hypothesis: visual artifacts are particularly helpful when grounding depends on preserving concrete scene com-mitments over time, retaining fine-grained perceptual distinctions, and supporting multi-step inference over evolving state. Textual externalization, however, remains competitive when the queried information is more naturally preserved as explicit propositions, particularly for cross-room topology and movement relations. 

## 6 Analysis 

The quantitative divergence between the visual and textual condi-tions highlights specific modality-driven trade-offs in multimodal memory management. We decompose these results to diagnose the underlying mechanisms of success and failure. 

Figure 5: Performance by reasoning scope. Left: overall accu-racy. Right: accuracy within the Spatial question type. 

Performance by Question Typology. A first useful distinction is between queries that require reasoning within a single retrieved scene ( Local ) and queries that require reasoning across scenes ( Rela-tional – including spatial distance, movement, revisitation). When performance is grouped by reasoning scope, a clear pattern emerges: 

Local questions are consistently easier than Relational ones (Fig-ure 5, left). 3 Across conditions, local questions reach roughly 50% 

accuracy, whereas relational questions fall closer to 30 –35% .This distinction is especially revealing in the spatial domain (Fig-ure 5, right) which contains numerous inter-scene questions (eg. 

“room to the left of kitchen” ). Both conditions degrade when the task shifts from identifying properties of a room to first traversing the environment and consequently gather information, but the drop is sharper in the image condition. The textual condition retains a modest advantage because scene summaries often preserve transi-tions propositionally, e.g., by explicitly stating that a speaker left the bathroom and went north . In contrast, the visual pipeline represents rooms as discrete artifacts and must recover connectivity through the sparse triplets produced by the Linker . When those links are missing, weak, or not retrieved strongly enough, the system fails to point out the correct artifact. This gap suggests that navigating over a fragmented memory bank and preserving their relations over time is a more challenging task especially for visual artifacts. This interpretation is further supported by the relationship be-tween the Constructor’s visual faithfulness score Φ and downstream accuracy (Figure 7). For Temporal queries, the relation is positive: as frame faithfulness increases, answer accuracy also improves. This is consistent with the intended role of visual scaffolding. When the 

> 3The distiction in reasoning scope has been manually annotated by the author and vetted via GPT-4o-mini [32]. Prompt available in Appendix B, Figure 21.

Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , ,                

> Verbatim Trace Snippet (ID: 14_116_47_95) [Turn 15] A : I am in the basement (New →A_5 )
> [Turn 16] B : I’m in a basement. (New →B_4 )
> [Turn 17] B : Has a white staircase? (Continue →B_4 )
> [Turn 18] A : no (Skip )
> [Turn 19] A : mine has wooden brown stair case (Continue →A_5 )
> B: What was the color of the stair in my basement like?
> A: It was white
> Image Condition Answer : white (Correct )
> Text Condition Answer : brown (Incorrect )
> (a) Turn 17. A’s current POV of B’s environment
> (b) Turn 19. A’s POV of A’s own env. that it shared with B.

Figure 6: Left: B uses a clarification question to check if A shares the same environment, implicitly revealing what B sees. Right: Visual scaffolding enforces epistemic boundaries. When B asks a clarification question, a white staircase is generated exclusively in B’s environment (a). A’s subsequent correction updates only A’s distinct canvas (b), preventing cross-contamination. 

Figure 7: Logistic Regression showing probability of a correct answer as a function of Visual Faithfulness ( Φ). 

system builds a faithful frame sequence, temporal information is preserved directly in the sequence itself, forming a robust timeline that is easy to retrieve from without a separate Linker .For Spatial queries, however, the trend reverses: higher local faithfulness is associated with lower accuracy. The reason is a re-trieval mismatch. A highly faithful image of a room is a strong retrieval target: when a query mentions a salient object in that room, the multimodal retriever confidently returns that image. But many spatial questions ask not about that room itself, but about an adjacent room or a topological relation between rooms. The system locks onto the most visually similar artifact – the correct starting point – but never follows the cross-frame link needed to reach the actual answer. 

Mechanisms Behind the Gains of Visual Scaffolding. The advantages of the image condition on Temporal , Attributive , and especially Inferred questions can be traced to two related mecha-nisms: reduced representational blur and forced commitment to a concrete scene interpretation. A recurring failure mode of text-based externalization is repre-sentational blur , where distinct entities or attributes are compressed into a vague or partially conflated summary. This is especially prob-lematic in IndiRef, where many questions hinge on small perceptual distinctions across revisited or highly similar scenes. Consider Fig-ure 8: the two bathrooms encountered by B (one with a red rug, the other with a yellow rug and a red tub, mentioned across distant turns) create the conditions under which textual compression fails, as the summary merges these cues into a collapsed description and produces a wrong answer. The visual scaffold avoids this collapse by instantiating both attributes as distinct elements within a sin-gle explicit state – not merely adding detail, but making collapse structurally impossible. A second advantage of visual scaffolding is that artifact con-struction imposes a form of forced commitment . When the two participants occupy separate environments, a local correction by one speaker can cause text-based summarizers to incorrectly over-write the other speaker’s established state. We observe this dynamic in Figure 6, where Player B implicitly reveals their local state by asking a clarification question. During evaluation, the Reasoner is given A’s role and is asked: “What was the color of the stair in my basement like?” by B. The textual summarizer frequently in-terprets Player A’s denial as a global correction of a mistaken fact, explicitly overwriting Player B’s reality with Player A’s description. Consequently, the text Reasoner incorrectly answers: “brown” .The visual scaffold bypasses this vulnerability. When B asks 

“Has a white staircase?” (Turn 17), the framework routes this update exclusively to B’s active visual frame, compelling the Constructor to render the white staircase. A’s subsequent assertion updates only A’s distinct canvas (Figure 6, right). Because the visual ar-chitecture enforces a strict physical separation of the two agents’ environments, it prevents linguistic cross-contamination and cor-rectly retrieves B’s original attribute ( “white” ). This also suggests why Agentic-Image performs better in Inferred cases.            

> Verbatim Trace Snippet (ID: 7_385_309_126) [Turn 7] B : west gets me bathroom. It has a red rug (Skip )... (B explores other rooms)
> [Turn 18] B : In the bathroom again (Continue →B_2 )
> [Turn 19] B : white toilet and yellow rug (Continue )
> [Turn 20] B : maybe (Skip )
> [Turn 21] A : yeah (Skip )
> [Turn 22] B : Red tub (Continue )
> B: Can you remind me of the color of the rug present in the red tub room?
> A: It was yellow
> Image Condition Answer : yellow (Correct )
> Text Condition Answer : red (Incorrect )

Figure 8: B’s exploration of the bathroom involves conflicting color attributes across distant turns. , , Mohapatra et al.                  

> Verbatim Trace Snippet (ID: 360_98_113_352) [Turn 0] A : Hi there. Looks like I’m outside (New →A_1 )
> [Turn 1] B : im in a bathroom (New →B_1 )
> [Turn 2] B : im in a childs room with a pink moon (New →B_2 )
> [Turn 3] A : I made it to the childs room. Mine has a blue wall ( New →A_2 )
> [Turn 4] A : OK, can you find this room with blue wall? (Skip )
> [Turn 5] B : It’s not yellow? (Skip )
> [Turn 6] B : ill find you (Skip )
> [Turn 7] A : ok (Skip )
> B: What was the colour of the walls of the pink moon room?
> A: It was yellow
> Image Condition Answer : white (Incorrect )
> Text Condition Answer : not specified (Incorrect )

Figure 9: B uses a negative clarification question ( “Not yel-low?” ) to implicitly state the color of their own room. The Observer treats this as non-depictable ( Skip ). 

Pragmatic Limitations and Failure Modes . Despite these ben-efits, the visual framework also exposes important limitations. The first concerns non-depictable or pragmatically indirect information. The system is effective at externalizing positive, visually express-ible commitments, but it is substantially weaker when the relevant information is conveyed through negation, denial, uncertainty, or implicature. Figure 9 illustrates this problem. Speaker B’s question, 

“It’s not yellow?” , pragmatically reveals information about B’s own room while checking whether it matches A’s. However, because the update is framed negatively and indirectly, the Observer treats it as non-depictable and skips it. The result is a lost grounding signal: the information never enters the artifact bank, and the later query fails. This is a broader limitation of the current framework. Images are effective carriers of positive depictable commitments, but they do not natively encode absence, negation, or discourse-level qualifi-cations unless these are explicitly preserved in metadata and made retrievable downstream. The second limitation occurs during memory retrieval. Human communication relies heavily on indirect requests; for instance, 

“Do you remember [X]?” functions as a prompt to state [X] . For example, when asked, “Do you remember the color of the walls of my first room?” , execution logs reveal that the Agentic-Image Reasoner successfully retrieved the correct visual artifact alongside its exact metadata ( “red room” ). Yet, the final output was simply: “yes” .

## 7 Hybrid Setting 

The qualitative analysis suggests that the contrast between Agentic-Image and Agentic-Text is best understood not as a simple competi-tion between two memory formats, but as a division of labor. The image condition is stronger when grounding depends on preserving fine-grained perceptual distinctions, maintaining concrete scene commitments over time, and supporting inference from explicit visualized states. The text condition, by contrast, remains more reliable for topology, negation, uncertainty, and other abstract or non-depictable aspects of the shared state. These complementary strengths motivated a final experiment where rather than forcing the system to rely on a single externalization format, we introduced an Agentic-Both condition that maintains both a visual artifact and its paired textual representation for each frame, and retrieves from both at inference time and sends them together as context to our VL model. Framework Relation Type (Accuracy) Temporal Spatial Attributive Inferred Agentic-Image 0.50 0.24 0.44 0.58 Agentic-Text 0.42 0.26 0.44 0.46 Agentic-Both 0.58 0.44 0.64 0.52 

Table 2: Accuracy of Agentic-Both setting. 

The results from Table 2 show that Agentic-Both produced the best overall performance across most categories. These gains sug-gest that the two modalities preserve partially non-overlapping evidence about the evolving common ground. In particular, the hybrid setting appears to reduce two of the main failure modes identified earlier: representational blur in the text condition and the navigation bottleneck in the image condition. The only exception is 

Inferred grounding, where Agentic-Image remains slightly stronger than the hybrid setting (0.58 vs. 0.52). One possible explanation is that many inferred questions benefit precisely from the forced commitment induced by visual externalization. Adding the textual channel may reintroduce ambiguity, thereby slightly diluting the benefit of the image-based commitment. 

## 8 Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper showed that conversational grounding in conversational agents benefits from incremental externalization : representing dia-logue as discrete, content-addressable states is more effective than reasoning directly over the full transcript. Within this incremental setting, visual scaffolding provides crucial grounding ability by forcing concrete scene commitments, reducing representational blur, and better preserving fine-grained perceptual distinctions over time. At the same time, the results show that visual scaffolding alone is not a complete substitute for textual representations. The image condition remains weaker where success often depends on explicit cross-frame topology rather than local depictive accuracy. More broadly, the two modalities exhibit complementary strengths: images are effective for preserving concrete perceptual commit-ments, while text remains better suited to abstract, relational, and non-depictable information. This complementarity is confirmed by the Agentic-Both setting, which achieves the strongest overall performance and suggests that persistent common ground is best modeled as an explicitly multimodal structure. These findings motivate three main directions for future work. First, rather than combining text and images only at retrieval time, future systems should build a more integrated multimodal mem-ory that jointly represents visual artifacts, textual summaries, and relational links. Second, low-confidence or conflicting multimodal evidence should be connected more directly to dialogue policy so that uncertainty can trigger clarification and repair rather than silent commitment. Our visual scaffolding method provides a way for the model to generate a mental imagery to detect such conflict-ing or underspecified information. Third, the main bottleneck for spatial grounding while using visual scaffolding lies in link quality ,which motivates stronger relational representations and navigation-aware retrieval, potentially through structured alternatives. Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

## 9 Safe and Responsible Innovation Statement 

This work aims to improve the reliability of multimodal dialogue systems by making their intermediate state explicit and inspectable. A key potential benefit is safer and more natural human–machine interaction, since stronger grounding can reduce ambiguity and un-reliable behavior. However, such systems still raise concerns around privacy, bias, and overconfident interpretation of user intent. Our experiments use benchmark data rather than personal user data, and we view this work as a step toward safer multimodal interac-tion through more transparent state tracking. Future deployment should include privacy-conscious practices, bias evaluation, and mechanisms for uncertainty-aware clarification. 

## References 

[1] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. 2025. Qwen3-VL Technical Report .arXiv:2511.21631 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2511.21631 [2] Lawrence Barsalou. 1999. Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (03 1999), 577–609. doi:10.1017/s0140525x99002149 [3] Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Virtual Event, Canada) (FAccT ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 610–623. doi:10.1145/3442188.3445922 [4] Chenyang Bu, Guojie Chang, Zihao Chen, CunYuan Dang, Zhize Wu, Yi He, and Xindong Wu. 2025. Query-Driven Multimodal GraphRAG: Dynamic Local Knowledge Graph Construction for Online Reasoning. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Compu-tational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 21360–21380. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1100 [5] Zihui Cheng, Qiguang Chen, Xiao Xu, Jiaqi WANG, Weiyun Wang, Hao Fei, Yidong Wang, Alex Jinpeng Wang, Zhi Chen, Wanxiang Che, and Libo Qin. 2025. Visual Thoughts: A Unified Perspective of Understanding Multimodal Chain-of-Thought. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . https://openreview.net/forum?id=xPcKmKSEis [6] Herbert H Clark and Susan E Brennan. 1991. Grounding in communication. (1991). [7] Herbert H. Clark and Ed Schaefer. 1989. Contributing to Discourse. Cogn. Sci. 13 (1989), 259–294. [8] Judith E. Fan, Wilma A. Bainbridge, Rebecca Chamberlain, and Jeffrey D. Wammes. 2023. Drawing as a Versatile Cognitive Tool. 2, 9 (2023), 556–568. doi:10.1038/ s44159-023-00212-w [9] Judith E. Fan, Robert D. Hawkins, Mike Wu, and Noah D. Goodman. 2020. Prag-matic Inference and Visual Abstraction Enable Contextual Flexibility During Visual Communication. 3, 1 (2020), 86–101. doi:10.1007/s42113-019-00058-7 [10] Rebecca Fincher-Kiefer. 2001. Perceptual components of situation models. Mem-ory & cognition 29 (04 2001), 336–43. doi:10.3758/BF03194928 [11] Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A. Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. 2025. BLINK: Multimodal Large Language Models Can See but Not Perceive. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 (Cham, 2025), Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten Sattler, and Gül Varol (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, 148–166. [12] Yilun Hua and Yoav Artzi. 2024. Talk Less, Interact Better: Evaluating In-context Conversational Adaptation in Multimodal LLMs. In First Conference on Language Modeling . https://openreview.net/forum?id=lVOw78nYXS [13] Holly Huey, Xuanchen Lu, Caren M. Walker, and Judith E. Fan. 2023. Visual Explanations Prioritize Functional Properties at the Expense of Visual Fidelity. 

Cognition 236 (2023), 105414. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2023.105414 [14] Nikolai Ilinykh, Sina Zarrieß, and David Schlangen. 2019. Meet Up! A Corpus of Joint Activity Dialogues in a Visual Environment. https://www.semdial.org/ anthology/papers/Z/Z19/Z19-3006/ [15] Léo Jacqmin, Lina M. Rojas Barahona, and Benoit Favre. 2022. “Do You Follow Me?”: A Survey of Recent Approaches in Dialogue State Tracking. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue 

(Edinburgh, UK, 2022-09), Oliver Lemon, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Junyi Jessy Li, Arash Ashrafzadeh, Daniel Hernández Garcia, Malihe Alikhani, David Vandyke, and Ondřej Dušek (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 336–350. doi:10. 18653/v1/2022.sigdial-1.33 [16] Pu Jian, Donglei Yu, and Jiajun Zhang. 2024. Large Language Models Know What Is Key Visual Entity: An LLM-assisted Multimodal Retrieval for VQA. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Miami, Florida, USA, 2024). Association for Computational Linguistics, 10939–10956. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.613 [17] John D. Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. 2006. Incremental Generation of Spatial Referring Expressions in Situated Dialog. In Proceedings of the 21st In-ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Nicoletta Calzolari, Claire Cardie, and Pierre Isabelle (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Sydney, Australia, 1041–1048. doi:10.3115/1220175.1220306 [18] Charles Kemp and Terry Regier. 2012. Kinship Categories Across Languages Reflect General Communicative Principles. Science 336, 6084 (2012), 1049– 1054. arXiv:https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1218811 doi:10. 1126/science.1218811 [19] Dimosthenis Kontogiorgos, Andre Pereira, and Joakim Gustafson. 2019. Estimat-ing Uncertainty in Task-Oriented Dialogue. In 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (Suzhou, China) (ICMI ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 414–418. doi:10.1145/3340555.3353722 [20] Jill H. Larkin and Herbert A. Simon. 1987. Why a Diagram is (Sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive Science 11, 1 (1987), 65–100. doi:10.1016/S0364-0213(87)80026-5 [21] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 9459–9474. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper_files/paper/2020/file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf [22] Chengzu Li, Wenshan Wu, Huanyu Zhang, Yan Xia, Shaoguang Mao, Li Dong, Ivan Vulić, and Furu Wei. 2025. Imagine While Reasoning in Space: Multimodal Visualization-of-Thought. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (2025-10-06). PMLR, 36340–36364. https://proceedings.mlr. press/v267/li25cz.html [23] Jiazheng Liu, Sipeng Zheng, Börje F. Karlsson, and Zongqing Lu. 2025. Taking Notes Brings Focus? Towards Multi-Turn Multimodal Dialogue Learning. (2025). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2503.07002 [24] Team Llama. 2024. The Llama 3 Herd of Models. ArXiv abs/2407.21783 (2024). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271571434 [25] Alan M. MacEachren, Robert E. Roth, James O’Brien, Bonan Li, Derek Swingley, and Mark Gahegan. 2012. Visual Semiotics & Uncertainty Visualization: An Empirical Study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 12 (2012), 2496–2505. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2012.279 [26] Biswesh Mohapatra, Théo Charlot, Giovanni Duca, Mayank Palan, Laurent Romary, and Justine Cassell. 2026. Frame of Reference: Addressing the Chal-lenges of Common Ground Representation in Situational Dialogs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09365 (2026). [27] Biswesh Mohapatra, Seemab Hassan, Laurent Romary, and Justine Cassell. 2024. Conversational Grounding: Annotation and Analysis of Grounding Acts and Grounding Units. In Proceedings of LREC-COLING . Association for Computational Linguistics. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268680732 [28] Biswesh Mohapatra, Manav Nitin Kapadnis, Laurent Romary, and Justine Cassell. 2024. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Large Language Models in Establishing Conversational Grounding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Miami, Florida, USA, 9767–9781. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.545 [29] Yukiko Nakano, Gabe Reinstein, Tom Stocky, and Justine Cassell. 2003. Towards a Model of Face-to-Face Grounding. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . Association for Computational Linguistics, Sapporo, Japan, 553–561. doi:10.3115/1075096.1075166 [30] Anjali Narayan-Chen, Prashant Jayannavar, and Julia Hockenmaier. 2019. Col-laborative Dialogue in Minecraft. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluís Màrquez (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 5405–5415. doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1537 [31] Fei Ni, Jianye Hao, Shiguang Wu, Longxin Kou, Jiashun Liu, Yan Zheng, Bin Wang, and Yuzheng Zhuang. 2024. Generate Subgoal Images Before Act: Unlocking the Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Diffusion Model for Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2024-06). 13991–14000. doi:10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01327 , , Mohapatra et al. 

[32] OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander Mądry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Car-ney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Alex Renzin, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Kirillov, Alexi Christakis, Alexis Conneau, Ali Kamali, Allan Jabri, Allison Moyer, Allison Tam, Amadou Crookes, Amin Tootoochian, Amin Tootoonchian, Ananya Kumar, Andrea Vallone, Andrej Karpathy, Andrew Braun-stein, Andrew Cann, Andrew Codispoti, Andrew Galu, Andrew Kondrich, An-drew Tulloch, Andrey Mishchenko, Angela Baek, Angela Jiang, Antoine Pelisse, Antonia Woodford, Anuj Gosalia, Arka Dhar, Ashley Pantuliano, Avi Nayak, Avital Oliver, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben Leimberger, Ben Rossen, Ben Sokolowsky, Ben Wang, Benjamin Zweig, Beth Hoover, Blake Samic, Bob Mc-Grew, Bobby Spero, Bogo Giertler, Bowen Cheng, Brad Lightcap, Brandon Walkin, Brendan Quinn, Brian Guarraci, Brian Hsu, Bright Kellogg, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi, Carroll Wainwright, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Casey Chu, Chad Nelson, Chak Li, Chan Jun Shern, Channing Conger, Charlotte Barette, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Cheng Lu, Chong Zhang, Chris Beaumont, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Christian Gibson, Christina Kim, Christine Choi, Christine McLeavey, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clemens Winter, Coley Czarnecki, Colin Jarvis, Colin Wei, Constantin Koumouzelis, Dane Sherburn, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levin, Daniel Levy, David Carr, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, David Sasaki, Denny Jin, Dev Valladares, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Duc Phong Nguyen, Duncan Findlay, Edede Oiwoh, Edmund Wong, Ehsan Asdar, Elizabeth Proehl, Elizabeth Yang, Eric Antonow, Eric Kramer, Eric Peterson, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Eugene Brevdo, Evan Mays, Farzad Khorasani, Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Francis Zhang, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Gabriel Goh, Gene Oden, Geoff Salmon, Giulio Starace, Greg Brockman, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Haitang Hu, Hannah Wong, Haoyu Wang, Heather Schmidt, Heather Whitney, Heewoo Jun, Hendrik Kirchner, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Hongyu Ren, Huiwen Chang, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Okuyucu, Ikai Lan, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jacob Coxon, Jacob Menick, Jakub Pachocki, James Aung, James Betker, James Crooks, James Lennon, Jamie Kiros, Jan Leike, Jane Park, Jason Kwon, Jason Phang, Jason Teplitz, Jason Wei, Jason Wolfe, Jay Chen, Jeff Harris, Jenia Varavva, Jessica Gan Lee, Jessica Shieh, Ji Lin, Jiahui Yu, Jiayi Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joanne Jang, Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Joe Beutler, Joe Landers, Joel Parish, Johannes Heidecke, John Schul-man, Jonathan Lachman, Jonathan McKay, Jonathan Uesato, Jonathan Ward, Jong Wook Kim, Joost Huizinga, Jordan Sitkin, Jos Kraaijeveld, Josh Gross, Josh Kaplan, Josh Snyder, Joshua Achiam, Joy Jiao, Joyce Lee, Juntang Zhuang, Justyn Harriman, Kai Fricke, Kai Hayashi, Karan Singhal, Katy Shi, Kavin Karthik, Kayla Wood, Kendra Rimbach, Kenny Hsu, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Button, Kevin Liu, Kiel Howe, Krithika Muthukumar, Kyle Luther, Lama Ahmad, Larry Kai, Lauren Itow, Lauren Workman, Leher Pathak, Leo Chen, Li Jing, Lia Guy, Liam Fedus, Liang Zhou, Lien Mamitsuka, Lilian Weng, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Long Ouyang, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lukas Kondraciuk, Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Hewitt, Luke Metz, Lyric Doshi, Mada Aflak, Maddie Simens, Made-laine Boyd, Madeleine Thompson, Marat Dukhan, Mark Chen, Mark Gray, Mark Hudnall, Marvin Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Mateusz Litwin, Matthew Zeng, Max Johnson, Maya Shetty, Mayank Gupta, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz, Meng Jia Yang, Mengchao Zhong, Mia Glaese, Mianna Chen, Michael Janner, Michael Lampe, Michael Petrov, Michael Wu, Michele Wang, Michelle Fradin, Michelle Pokrass, Miguel Castro, Miguel Oom Temudo de Castro, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Brundage, Miles Wang, Minal Khan, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Mu-rat Yesildal, Nacho Soto, Natalia Gimelshein, Natalie Cone, Natalie Staudacher, Natalie Summers, Natan LaFontaine, Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nick Stathas, Nick Turley, Nik Tezak, Niko Felix, Nithanth Kudige, Nitish Keskar, Noah Deutsch, Noel Bundick, Nora Puckett, Ofir Nachum, Ola Okelola, Oleg Boiko, Oleg Murk, Oliver Jaffe, Olivia Watkins, Olivier Godement, Owen Campbell-Moore, Patrick Chao, Paul McMillan, Pavel Belov, Peng Su, Peter Bak, Peter Bakkum, Peter Deng, Peter Dolan, Peter Hoeschele, Peter Welinder, Phil Tillet, Philip Pronin, Philippe Tillet, Prafulla Dhariwal, Qiming Yuan, Rachel Dias, Rachel Lim, Rahul Arora, Rajan Troll, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Raul Puri, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renaud Gaubert, Reza Zamani, Ricky Wang, Rob Donnelly, Rob Honsby, Rocky Smith, Rohan Sahai, Rohit Ramchandani, Romain Huet, Rory Carmichael, Rowan Zellers, Roy Chen, Ruby Chen, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Ryan Cheu, Saachi Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Schoenholz, Sam Toizer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sara Culver, Scott Ethersmith, Scott Gray, Sean Grove, Sean Metzger, Shamez Hermani, Shantanu Jain, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shino Jomoto, Shirong Wu, Shuaiqi, Xia, Sonia Phene, Spencer Papay, Srinivas Narayanan, Steve Coffey, Steve Lee, Stewart Hall, Suchir Balaji, Tal Broda, Tal Stramer, Tao Xu, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas Cunninghman, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Thomas Raoux, Thomas Shad-well, Tianhao Zheng, Todd Underwood, Todor Markov, Toki Sherbakov, Tom Rubin, Tom Stasi, Tomer Kaftan, Tristan Heywood, Troy Peterson, Tyce Wal-ters, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Veit Moeller, Vinnie Monaco, Vishal Kuo, Vlad Fomenko, Wayne Chang, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wesam Manassra, Will Sheu, Wojciech Zaremba, Yash Patil, Yilei Qian, Yongjik Kim, Youlong Cheng, Yu Zhang, Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yujia Jin, Yunxing Dai, and Yury Malkov. 2024. GPT-4o System Card. arXiv:2410.21276 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276 [33] Naoki Otani, Jun Araki, HyeongSik Kim, and Eduard Hovy. 2023. On the Un-derspecification of Situations in Open-domain Conversational Datasets. In Pro-ceedings of the 5th Workshop on NLP for Conversational AI (NLP4ConvAI 2023) ,Yun-Nung Chen and Abhinav Rastogi (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 12–28. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.nlp4convai-1.2 [34] Lace Padilla, Matthew Kay, and Jessica Hullman. 2021. Un-certainty Visualization . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1–18. arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118445112.stat08296 doi:10.1002/9781118445112.stat08296 [35] Allan Paivio. 1991. Dual Coding Theory: Retrospect and Current Status. 45, 3 (1991), 255–287. doi:10.1037/h0084295 [36] Sandro Pezzelle. 2023. Dealing with Semantic Underspecification in Multimodal NLP. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Toronto, Canada, 2023-07), Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 12098–12112. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.675 [37] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. arXiv:2103.00020 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/ abs/2103.00020 [38] Aleksandar Shtedritski, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. 2023. What does CLIP know about a red circle? Visual prompt engineering for VLMs. In 

2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 11953–11963. doi:10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.01101 [39] Kristian Tylén, Riccardo Fusaroli, Sergio Rojo, Katrin Heimann, Nicolas Fay, Niels N Johannsen, Felix Riede, and Marlize Lombard. 2020. The evolution of early symbolic behavior in Homo sapiens. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 9 (2020), 4578–4584. doi:10.1073/pnas.1910880117 [40] Takuma Udagawa and Akiko Aizawa. 2021. Maintaining Common Ground in Dynamic Environments. 9 (2021), 995–1011. doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00409 [41] Yael Vinker, Ehsan Pajouheshgar, Jessica Y. Bo, Roman Christian Bachmann, Amit Haim Bermano, Daniel Cohen-Or, Amir Zamir, and Ariel Shamir. 2022. CLIPasso: Semantically-Aware Object Sketching. 41, 4, Article 86 (2022). doi:10. 1145/3528223.3530068 [42] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng-ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, Deqing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. 2025. Qwen-Image Technical Report . arXiv:2508.02324 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.02324 [43] Yuncong Yang, Han Yang, Jiachen Zhou, Peihao Chen, Hongxin Zhang, Yilun Du, and Chuang Gan. 2025. 3D-Mem: 3D Scene Memory for Embodied Exploration and Reasoning. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 17294–17303. doi:10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.01612 [44] Zeyuan Yang, Xueyang Yu, Delin Chen, Maohao Shen, and Chuang Gan. 2025. 

Machine Mental Imagery: Empower Multimodal Reasoning with Latent Visual Tokens . arXiv:2506.17218 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2506.17218 [45] Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. 2017. Scene Parsing through ADE20K Dataset. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 5122–5130. doi:10.1109/ CVPR.2017.544 [46] George Kingsley Zipf. 1949. Human behavior and the principle of least effort: An introduction to human ecology . Addison-Wesley Press. [47] Rolf A. Zwaan and Gabriel A. Radvansky. 1998. Situation models in language comprehension and memory. Psychological bulletin 123 2 (1998), 162–85. doi:10. 1037/0033-2909.123.2.162 Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

## A Example of Pipeline 

To illustrate the transformation from dialogue to visual artifacts, we examine a trace from the test set involving a description of a bedroom in Figures 10, 11, 12, and 13. This trace demonstrates the Observer ’s state segmentation and the Constructor ’s iterative refinement capabilities. 

Turn 1: Initialization [NEW] 

Utterance (B): “in bedroom” 

Action: The Observer detects a location change and triggers a 

New action (Frame ID: 𝐵 _1). 

Constructor: Since there is no prior visual context, the Con-structor generates a base scene from scratch. 

Prompt: “A clean, minimalist, iconic scene. In a bedroom, a bed (in blue outline), a nightstand (in blue outline), and a lamp (in blue outline). Solid white background, no shadows.” 

Result: A foundational image establishing the spatial layout. 

Figure 10: Turn 1: Initialization of the visual state based on a location change. The Observer detects the need for a new frame, and the Constructor generates an initial scene with the specified objects. Turn 2: Incremental Update [CONTINUE] 

Utterance (B): “window at back” 

Action: The Observer recognizes this as an elaboration of the current state ( 𝐵 _1) and triggers Continue .

Constructor: The system enters “Editing Mode.” It retrieves the image from Turn 1 and applies a structural update. 

Prompt: “Add a wall (in blue outline) at the back of the bed-room... Add a window (in black outline) on the wall. Keep the bed, nightstand, and lamp unchanged.” 

Result: The visual state ( 𝐵 _1_𝑠𝑒𝑞 2) now contains the window while preserving the geometric consistency of the previous objects. 

Figure 11: Turn 2: The Observer detects an elaboration of the current scene and triggers a continuation. The Constructor modifies the existing image by adding new elements while keeping the previous ones intact, demonstrating the system’s ability to maintain visual consistency across updates. Turn 4: Phatic Filtering [SKIP] 

Utterance (A): “Okay, I’m still looking.” 

Action: The Observer classifies this as non-depictable phatic communication. 

Result: No visual generation occurs. The system maintains the state at 𝐵 _1_𝑠𝑒𝑞 3 (generated in Turn 3), preventing the visual history from being cluttered with redundant frames. 

Figure 12: Turn 4: The Observer identhifies a phatic utterance that does not contribute new visual information. By classi-fying it as Skip , the system avoids unnecessary generation, demonstrating its ability to filter out non-visual content and maintain a clean visual history. Turn 5: Feature Modification [CONTINUE] 

Utterance (B): “red and grey stripped bedspread” 

Action: The user refines a specific attribute of an existing object. 

Constructor: The prompt explicitly targets the specific entity for replacement while freezing the rest of the scene. 

Prompt: “Replace the bed (in blue outline) with a bed (in black outline) that has a red and grey striped bedspread. Keep the nightstand, lamp, wall... unchanged.” 

Result: The artifact 𝐵 _1_𝑠𝑒𝑞 4 reflects the texture update. By explicitly instructing the model to “Keep” other elements, we mitigate the cata-strophic forgetting often observed in iterative generation. 

Figure 13: Turn 5: The user provides a detailed refinement of an existing object. The Constructor processes this as a targeted modification, replacing the bed’s appearance while preserving the rest of the scene. This demonstrates the sys-tem’s ability to handle incremental updates without losing previously established visual information. , , Mohapatra et al. 

## B Prompts 

We further provide all the prompts used for the multimodal rep-resentation work, specifically Figures 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, and 20. 

Observer 

You are an analytical and decisive AI, part of a common ground visualization mechanism. Your task is to analyze the conversation history and the current target utterance to decide how to interpret the information and update the mental imagery of the scene. 

[Conversation Contextualization] Inputs: 

• Context: The conversation history containing previous utterances. 

• Previous Prompts: A list of prompts that built the current mental imagery state. 

• Target Utterance: The new piece of information to reason on. 

Output Template: 

{"frame_meta": "Scene Label: Non-visual info", "relation": "[RELATION_META]", "imagery": "[IMAGERY]", "action": "[ACTION]" }

Rules: 

• (Meta Information) frame_meta : Identify the location gist (1-3 words) and append non-visual info (e.g., smells, temp). relation :Populate if the utterance indicates movement or connection to a previous frame. 

• (Imagery) Extract only visualizable information from the target .Maintain the speaker’s tone and use Theory of Mind to contextual-ize what the speaker sees. 

• (Action) Decide the state transition: 

– [NEW] : If previous is None OR visual info is unrelated to the current frame. 

– [CONTINUE] : If visual info can be added to the current frame. 

– [SKIP] : If no visual info is present (acknowledgments, fillers). 

[Examples] 

Figure 14: Condensed prompt for the Observer module. The full prompt includes detailed definitions for frame metadata and extensive conversation examples to guide the model’s reasoning process regarding scene transitions and theory of mind. Constructor - Image Condition 

You are a visual generation engine acting as either a "Scene Creator" (for new scenes) or a "Scene Editor" (for updates). Your goal is to translate text utter-ances into precise, renderable image prompts using a minimalist, iconic style. 

[Conversation Contextualization] Inputs: 

• Creation Mode: <context> , <target> .

• Editing Mode: <context> , <target> , <previous> (history of prompts). 

Output Template: 

{"scene": "A clean, minimalist, iconic scene... [PROMPT Content]" }

Common Rules: 

• (Style) Clean, minimalist, iconic. Global background must be Solid White .

• (Structural Pairing) Background elements (e.g., walls) must include their logical pair (e.g., floors) in blue outline to ground the scene. 

Mode-Specific Rules: 

• Creation (Start): – (Color Semantics) Black Outline : Explicit/Unambiguous ob-jects. Blue Outline : Assumed/Context objects (limit 3). Red Outline : Uncertain/Relative position. 

– (Composition) Total explicit + assumed objects should be be-tween 1 and 3. 

• Editing (Update): – (Operations) Use "Add", "Remove", "Replace". Move and Rescale 

must be deconstructed into DELETE $$$ ADD .

– (Persistence) You must explicitly state which existing objects to "Keep unchanged". 

– (Logic) If adding "A near B" and B is also new, add both instruc-tions. 

[Examples] 

Figure 15: Condensed prompt for the Constructor module in the Image condition. The full prompt includes comprehen-sive style guidelines for minimalist generation and complex editing logic—such as deconstructing move and rescale oper-ations—to guide the model’s reasoning process. Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

Constructor - Text Condition 

You are a "Situation Summarizer" and "Tracker". Your goal is to create and maintain a concise, natural language "mental model" of the physical environment based on conversational updates. 

[Conversation Contextualization] Inputs: 

• Creation Mode: <target> , <context> (to resolve ambiguities like "here" or "it"). 

• Update Mode: <previous> (current summary), <target> (new info). 

Output Template: 

{"scene": "A single, cohesive natural language paragraph summarizing the state." }

Common Rules: 

• (Certainty Levels) 

– Explicit: Clearly stated facts (e.g., "There is a red cup"). 

– Implied: Contextual deductions (e.g., "Kitchen implies stove"). 

– Uncertain: Vague info must be stated as such (e.g., "User be-lieves there might be..."). 

Mode-Specific Rules: 

• Creation: Describe location, objects, and spatial relations based 

only on the target, grounded by context. 

• Update: Rewrite the previous summary to incorporate the target: 

– Add/Refine: Integrate new objects or details. 

– Correct: Overwrite contradictions (e.g., "Actually, it’s blue"). 

– Preserve: Keep all non-contradicted previous facts. 

[Examples] 

Figure 16: Condensed prompt for the Constructor module in the Text condition. The full prompt includes nuanced rules for handling uncertainty levels (explicit vs. implied) and examples of textual state updates to guide the model’s reasoning process. Verifier 

1. Prompt Summarizer (Ground Truth Extraction) 

• Role: Extract a comprehensive list of visual atomic facts from a sequence of prompts. 

• Rules: – (Filtering) Include objects with Red and Black outlines. Strictly 

exclude Blue outlines. 

– (Atomicity) Break complex descriptions into single facts (e.g., "Red cat on sofa" → "There is a cat", "It is red", "On a sofa"). 

• Output: JSON with a list of strings under key "facts" .

2. Image Captioner (Visual Analysis) 

• Role: Describe an image following strict hierarchical rules based on outline colors. 

• Rules: – (Order) 1. Black Outlines → 2. Red Outlines → 3. Blue Outlines. 

– (Detail Level) Black/Red: Comprehensive (Type, Color, Features, Location). Blue: Simple (Type only). 

– (Relations) For Black objects, describe position relative to other Black objects. 

3. Fact Checker (Visual Forensics) 

• Role: Verify if a list of text facts is true in the provided image. 

• Rules: – (Evidence First) For every fact, first attempt to draw a bounding box [ymin, xmin, ymax, xmax] .

– (Precision) Strict attribute matching (e.g., if fact says "red" but image is "blue", verdict is FALSE). 

• Output: JSON with "fact" , "box" , and "verdict" (boolean). 

[Examples] 

Figure 17: Condensed prompt for the Verifier module. The full prompt includes distinct instructions for the three sub-agents (Prompt Summarizer, Image Captioner, and Fact Checker) along with strict visual forensic rules to guide the model’s reasoning process. , , Mohapatra et al. 

Linker 

You are an analytical AI tasked with resolving natural language directives into precise Knowledge Graph Triplets that connect specific Frame IDs in a common ground visualization. 

[Conversation Contextualization] Inputs: 

• Directive: The specific utterance describing the relation. 

• Context: Frame IDs for PREV_FRAME , CURR_FRAME , and 

NEXT_FRAME .

• Frame Meta: Scene information corresponding to these IDs. 

Output Template: 

{"triplets": [ { "subject": "{FRAME_ID}", "predicate": "{RELATION}", "object": "{FRAME_ID}" }]}

Rules: 

• (Frame ID Strictness) You must ONLY use the specific Frame IDs provided. If a frame is None , do not create a relationship to it. 

• (Directionality) Ensure logical flow. 

– Example: "North from X to Y" → Y is_north_of X .

– Example: "Kitchen next to Hall" → Hall is_next_to Kitchen .

• (Ambiguity) If the directive cannot be resolved to the provided frames or is conversational filler, return an empty list [] .

[Examples] 

Figure 18: Condensed prompt for the Linker module. The full prompt includes specific constraints on frame ID usage and directionality rules for resolving spatial relations to guide the model’s reasoning process. Reasoner 

1. Master Planner 

• Role: Break down user questions into a high-level strategic plan. 

• Commands: – POV : Identify perspective (User A, B, or BOTH). 

– RAG[k=N] : Retrieve top N relevant images/summary blocks. 

– PROCESS : Filter, transform, or reason about gathered info. 

– FINAL_ANSWER : Formulate the response (Must be the last step). 

• Output: XML-like format <answer><item> Step 1... </item>...</answer> .

2. Instruction Refiner 

• Role: Refine high-level plan steps into simple, direct natural lan-guage tasks for the Processor. 

• Rule: Do not use SQL. Convert RAG instructions into search-friendly terms. 

3. Data Processor 

• Role: Execute specific instructions on provided context (e.g., "Find the image with the red bed"). 

• Constraints: Output only the requested result (raw & clean). No conversational filler. 

• Logic: Respect Temporal Logic (ImageID/BlockID = distinct events) vs Versioning (SequenceID = updates). 

4. Final Answerer 

• Role: Answer the specific sub-question using only the retrieved info. 

• Format: 

<think> ... reasoning ... </think> <answer> ... final verdict ... </answer> 

• Logic: If Yes/No question: return "yes"/"no" instead of IDs. 

[Examples] 

Figure 19: Condensed prompt for the Reasoner module. The full prompt includes separate instructions for the Planner, Refiner, Processor, and Answerer agents, along with strict protocols for temporal logic and execution to guide the model’s reasoning process. Using Machine Mental Imagery for Representing Common Ground in Situated Dialogue , , 

Judge 

You are a strict evaluator. Your task is to compare an LLM response against a correct response (ground truth) given a specific question and determine if they convey the same meaning. 

[Contextualization] Inputs: 

• Question: The original query. 

• LLM Response: The answer generated by the model. 

• Correct Response: The ground truth answer. 

Output Template: 

<reasoning> (1-2 sentences explaining why they are the same or different.) </reasoning> <answer> (SAME or DIFFERENT) </answer> 

Rules: 

• (Equivalence) Output ’SAME’ if the main content/meaning is iden-tical. 

– Synonyms: Count as same. 

– Style Differences: "Yes, there was a car" vs "A car was there" 

→ SAME. 

– Negation Styles: "Do not recall a cat" vs "No cats were there" 

→ SAME. 

• (Differentiation) Output ’DIFFERENT’ if meanings diverge. 

– Logical Negation: If one contradicts the other. 

– Distinct Entities: "Kitchen" vs "Dining Room" → DIFFERENT (do not reason about similar functions). 

• (Focus) Ignore intermediate reasoning; judge only the final answer provided at the end. 

[Examples] 

Figure 20: Condensed prompt for the Judge module. The full prompt includes specific criteria for distinguishing semantic meaning from stylistic differences and handling negations to guide the model’s reasoning process during evaluation. Annotator 

You are an expert Data Annotation Specialist for a Conversational AI dataset. Your task is to analyze a specific Question-Answer pair from a dialogue about a physical environment and classify its complexity, constraints, and validity. 

Inputs: 

• Relation Type: {{ relation_type }} 

• Question: "{{ question }}" 

• Gold Answer: "{{ gold_answer }}" 

Classification Definitions & Rules: 

• (Complexity Type) Local vs. Relational: Determine if the ques-tion can be answered by looking at the content of a single room visualized in isolation, or if it requires traversing a map/timeline. 

– Local: The target is identified by its internal visual attributes or specific name. If you were teleported directly into the target room, you could answer the question without knowing how you got there or when you visited it. (Examples: "What color is the wall in the kitchen?", "Which room has a red couch?", "Is there a TV in this room?") 

– Relational: The target is identified by its spatial connection to other rooms or its order in time. You need a map or a history log to identify the correct target. (Examples: "What is in the room north of the kitchen?", "What was the first room I visited?", "Is the room I am in now bigger than the previous one?") 

• (Question Type) Binary vs. Open: – Binary: The question demands a Yes/No/True/False verification. 

– Open: The question asks for specific content, counts, or descrip-tions. 

• (Constraint Type) List vs. Free: – List: The question explicitly lists candidates to check (e.g., "Which among the kitchen, bath, or hall...?", "Is it red or blue?"). 

– Free: The search space is open to the entire context or vocabu-lary. 

• (Validity Type) Valid vs. Missing: – Valid: The answer provides the requested information or defini-tively confirms/denies a fact. 

– Missing: The answer states that the premise of the question is false, the object was not mentioned, or the information is unknown. 

Output Format Rules 

Return ONLY a single valid JSON object. The keys must exactly match the provided output template. JSON Template: 

{ "complexity_type": "local", "question_type": "binary", "constraint_type": "free", "validity_type": "valid" } 

Figure 21: Full prompt for the Annotator, used for the quan-titative analysis. ‘Validity’ was never used in the work.