Title: Enhancing Structured Meaning Representations with Aspect Classification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24797v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:11:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Enhancing Structured Meaning Representations with Aspect Classification 

# Claire Benét Post ∗, Paul Bontempo ∗, August Milliken ∗,Alvin Po-Chun Chen, Nicholas Derby, Saksham Khatwani, Sumeyye Nabieva, Karthik Sairam, and Alexis Palmer 

University of Colorado, Boulder 

Abstract 

To fully capture the meaning of a sentence, semantic representations should encode aspect , which describes the internal temporal structure of events. In graph-based meaning representation frameworks such as Uniform Meaning Representations (UMR), aspect lets one know how events unfold over time, including distinctions such as states, activities, and completed events. Despite its importance, aspect remains sparsely annotated across semantic meaning representation frameworks. This has, in turn, hindered not only current manual annotation, but also the development of automatic systems capable of predicting aspectual information. In this paper, we introduce a new dataset of English sentences annotated with UMR aspect labels over Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) graphs that lack the feature. We describe the annotation scheme and guidelines used to label eventive predicates according to the UMR aspect lattice, as well as the annotation pipeline used to ensure consistency and quality across annotators through a multi-step adjudication process. To demonstrate the utility of our dataset for future automation, we present baseline experiments using three modeling approaches. Our results establish initial benchmarks for automatic UMR aspect prediction and provide a foundation for integrating aspect into semantic meaning representations more broadly. 

Keywords: Aspect annotation, semantic meaning representations, aspectual generation benchmarks 

# 1. Introduction 

Semantic representations frequently center around capturing components of meaning related to the core events conveyed by individual natural lan-guage utterances. Nearly all meaning representa-tion (MR) formats express the core predicates asso-ciated with those events, along with any arguments to those predicates. MRs differ quite substantially, though, when it comes to the expression of addi-tional event information, such as tense, modality, aspect, or information structure. Languages also differ substantially in the degree to which they gram-maticalize (or require the expression of) the same event-related information. Aspect is a core component of Uniform Mean-ing Representation (UMR), a graph-based seman-tic framework designed to represent meaning in a cross-linguistically applicable and computation-ally tractable way. Unlike tense, which encodes 

when an event occurs, aspect captures the how :the internal temporal structure, duration, and com-pletedness of events (Comrie, 1976), (Croft, 2012), (Donatelli et al., 2018). It allows a semantic sys-tem to distinguish between, for example, habitual, ongoing processes, or completed achievements, enabling a more nuanced interpretation of event semantics. In UMR, aspect is applied to all eventive elements (also known as eventualities ) in a sentence. The central eventuality introduced by an utterance is 

> 1∗

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

She is still writing her paper. (w/ write-01 :ARG0 (p/ person :ref-person 3rd :ref-number Singular) :ARG1 (p2/ paper :poss p:ref-number Singular) :mod (s/ still) :aspect Activity :modstr FullAff) 

Figure 1: Example UMR graph with the eventive highlighted with an Activity aspectual marker. typically the concept aligned with the main finite verb, as seen in Fig. 1. Eventualities in UMR refer to the full predication, encompassing the verb and its arguments (Donatelli et al., 2019; Kingsbury and Palmer, 2003). UMR defines a particular inventory of aspectual categories, aligned with other well-established event typologies, including (among oth-ers) states, activities, accomplishments, achieve-ments, and processes (Bach, 1986). In UMR the as-pectual categories are organized into a lattice that supports both coarse- and fine-grained aspectual distinctions. Unlike surface-level grammatical cues, like those in auxiliaries or verb morphology, UMR aspect is a semantic feature. It abstracts away from morphosyntactic form to represent covert event structure and is intended to generalize across ty-pologically diverse languages (Van Gysel et al., 

> arXiv:2603.24797v1 [cs.CL] 25 Mar 2026

2021). Annotating aspect is no simple feat. Theoretical debates span decades, including disagreements about the universality of aspectual categories, the granularity of classifications, and their interac-tion with tense and modality (Reichenbach, 1947; Vendler, 1957; Comrie, 1976; Langacker, 2011; Dowty, 1986; Hinrichs, 1986; Moens and Steed-man, 1988; Klein, 2013; Chang et al., 2022; Partee, 2011; Croft, 2012). While there are a number of cor-pora with aspect annotations, and several compu-tational models (Friedrich et al., 2023), there is no unified approach to annotation or modeling (among others: Pustejovsky et al., 2003; Derczynski, 2017; Pustejovsky et al., 2017; Friedrich and Palmer, 2014; Friedrich et al., 2016; Mostafazadeh et al., 2016; Laparra et al., 2018; O’Gorman et al., 2016; Gantt et al., 2022). From a typological perspective, some languages encode aspect more saliently than others, further complicating annotation for multilingual or cross-linguistic frameworks. For example, American Sign Language and Mandarin Chinese prioritize as-pectual distinctions over tense (Li and Thompson, 1989; McDonald, 1982), while Hindi includes a ded-icated aspect morpheme separate from tense or mood (Van Olphen, 1975). In contrast, many Indo-European languages conflate aspect and tense morphologically, often obscuring the underlying se-mantic distinctions. Given these complexities, manual aspect annota-tion is time-consuming, error-prone, and highly sen-sitive to annotator interpretation. Yet its inclusion in UMR is a cornerstone to achieving a more ex-pressive, cross-linguistic meaning representation system. UMR builds on earlier formalisms such as Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) (Ba-narescu et al., 2013), where aspect was initially introduced to support event-based reasoning but was never fully adopted into standard annotation guidelines. Donatelli et al. (2018, 2019) formalize aspect in AMR, laying out annotation principles and aligning event types with lexical frames. Despite its importance for accurately repre-senting event semantics, aspect remains under-annotated in existing UMR resources. This scarcity limits both the scale and consistency of manual UMR annotation and hinders development of auto-matic parsers capable of reliably predicting aspect. To address this bottleneck, we present a new dataset of English sentences manually annotated with UMR aspect labels. Annotators are provided with AMR-derived graphs for each sentence and asked to label eventualities according to the UMR aspect lattice (see 4.1 for corpus details). AMR graphs can be converted to UMR graphs with a combination of automated processing and manual intervention, and Bonn et al. (2023b) outline the correspondences and differences between the two formalisms. By adding aspect annotations, the new dataset provides a bridge to complete UMR graphs. Our annotation pipeline combines structured an-notator training with multiple rounds of indepen-dent annotation, group adjudication sessions, and expert consultation to improve the guidelines and resolve difficult annotation decisions, resulting in a high-quality resource intended to support future UMR modeling efforts. To validate dataset quality, we additionally report baseline experiments span-ning three modeling families: (1) a rule-based ap-proach, (2) an embedding-based classifier, and (3) a large language model (LLM) prompting approach. We target two complementary objectives: 

• Task 1: Data annotation. We construct a new gold-standard dataset of carefully validated sentences labeled according to the UMR as-pect annotation scheme. 

• Task 2: Baseline modeling. We present stan-dard data splits and initial performance bench-marks for automated UMR aspect labeling. To support both tasks, we perform a large-scale annotation project, resulting in a new dataset of 

1, 473 manually annotated aspect labels for the eventive predicates of AMR graphs. This is the first dataset designed to support supervised learn-ing approaches for UMR aspect annotation. 

# 2. Related Work 

The semantics of aspect has been a long-standing topic of debate in linguistic theory. Seminal works by Reichenbach (1947), Vendler (1957), and Com-rie (1976) lay the foundation for distinguishing be-tween types of eventualities–states, achievements, activities, accomplishments–based on their tem-poral and structural properties. Dowty (1986) and Langacker (2011) further explore the interaction between aspect, argument structure, and lexical semantics. These formalisms inform how events are modeled in UMR today. Later developments such as Hinrichs’ interval-based models (1986), Moens and Steedman’s nar-rative structure theory (1988), and Klein’s temporal logic (2013) introduce more formal ways to encode event structure and its temporal entailments. These insights highlight the need for meaning representa-tion frameworks like UMR to go beyond grammati-cal tense and directly encode aspectual distinctions based on semantic content. 

Aspect annotation. Aspect has been incorpo-rated into previous semantic annotation and event modeling efforts, particularly in temporal informa-tion extraction. TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003) Figure 2: UMR aspect lattice with aspectual values utilized in our English annotation highlighted in yellow. and its follow-up projects such as the TempEval competitions (Derczynski, 2017) include annota-tion for aspect, though typically via shallow tex-tual cues. There are several datasets developed with robust manual aspect annotation that consider sentential context and event structure, such as DI-ASPORA (Kober et al., 2020) and the Universal Decompositional Semantics dataset (Gantt et al., 2021); however, these datasets employ coarse-grained aspect classes, rather than the more exten-sive and typologically-applicable lattice provided by the UMR framework. More recent work seeks to automate aspect classification using linguistic features (Friedrich and Palmer, 2014), discourse roles (Friedrich et al., 2016), and LSTM-based models that integrate context (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016; Laparra et al., 2018). While effective to some degree, these systems often operate over flat text or shallow syntactic rep-resentations. They do not handle the rich predicate-argument structures or graph-based semantics found in UMR and AMR. Moreover, they treat as-pect as a kind of downstream feature, rather than an integral part of event structure representation. Efforts to include aspect in AMR were initiated by Donatelli et al. (2018), but aspect is not part of AMR’s core schema. On the other hand, UMR incor-porates aspect explicitly into its annotation guide-lines, enabling more structured reasoning about events across languages. 

Aspect Annotation in UMR. Due to the small amount of available UMR data, prior work has fo-cused primarily on methods for generating UMR graphs without supervised training. Chun and Xue (2024) propose a multi-step strategy for converting AMR graphs into UMR graphs by using a variety of existing automation tools, such as by using a modal dependency parser. Similarly, Sun et al. (2024) ex-periment with few-shot and Think-Aloud prompting on LLMs to generate Chinese UMR graphs without AMR data as input. AutoAspect , which directly tar-gets UMR aspect, proposes a rule-based approach specifically for classifying UMR aspects in English UMR graphs (Chen et al., 2021a). While these approaches produce some positive results, we find in our investigations that training on a larger dataset is necessary for further improve-ment. Moreover, significant refinements have been made to the UMR dataset since these resources were published, as seen in (Bonn et al., 2024a). 

# 3. Annotation Scheme 

## 3.1. UMR Aspect Lattice 

This paper is concerned with the aspect annotation of English sentences, as highlighted in Figure 2. The aspectual categories chosen for English anno-tation include a set of base-level distinctions– State ,

Performance , Endeavor , Activity , and Habitual , and 

Habitual –as well as a more coarse-grained value for event nominals and other underspecified events, 

Process .UMR organizes aspectual categories within an aspect lattice, a hierarchical structure that captures relationships between coarse and fine-grained la-bels. This design allows annotations to represent general distinctions while remaining compatible with more specific readings when additional linguis-tic information is available. This structure is particularly useful for cross-linguistic semantic annotation. English often relies on relatively coarse-grained aspectual distinctions, while other languages encode finer aspectual con-trasts directly in their grammar. The lattice enables UMR to support consistent representations across typologically diverse languages. This was a major motivation for our work, and we hope in the future to expand aspect annotation to more languages. 

## 3.2. Aspect Types 

State. This value corresponds to stative events, indicating that no change occurs during the event, as prescribed by (Vendler, 1967). It includes predicate nominals, predicate locations, and thetic (presentational) possession. [1] The cat loves milk .        

> (l/ love-01 :ARG0 (c/ cat :ref-number Singular) :ARG1 (m/ milk) :aspect State :modstr FullAff)

More specifically, in English, the State value encom-passes modal verbs (e.g., "The cat needs to eat.") and events under the scope of ability modals (e.g., "The cat is able to eat."). UMR classifies inactive actions , as defined by (Croft, 2012), as stative. This includes posture verbs (e.g., "The cat hangs on the windowsill."), perception verbs (e.g., "The cat 

sees milk."), mental activities (e.g., "The cat thinks 

about jazz."), verbs of operation (e.g., "The cat is 

working on catching mice."). The State value, in English, is also an umbrella that covers inherent states (e.g., "The cat is black."), reversible states (e.g., "The cat is hungry ."), irreversible states (e.g., "The glass is shattered ."), and point states (e.g., "When it is 12:30pm, feed the cat."). 

Performance. This category covers events that reach a result state, such as achievements that have some instantaneous binary change, accomplishments where there is a run-up process before the change, or when the event reaches a result state that has a natural endpoint. [2] The cat walked along the fence in 2 min-utes.                

> (w/ walk-01 :ARG0 (c/ cat :ref-number Singular) :ARG2 (a/ along :op1 (f/ fence)) :duration (t/ temporal-quantity :unit (m/ minute) :quant 2) :aspect Performance :modstr FullAff)

For instance, completive markers (e.g., "The cat fin-ished climbing up the tree .") and container adver-bials (e.g., "The cats scampered along the fence 

in 10 seconds .") are both indicators that an event has reached a distinct result state. 

Endeavor. The Endeavor value is often mistaken for Performance and vice versa. Endeavor is used for processes that end within the time window in question, but do not reach a particular result state: e.g., compare graph [2] to graph [3] below. [3] The cat walked along the fence.           

> (w/ walk-01 :ARG0 (c/ cat :ref-number Singular) :ARG2 (a/ along :op1 (f/ fence)) :aspect Endeavor :modstr FullAff)

Generally, Endeavor requires an explicit aspectual marking in English to be considered an Endeavor .Terminative aspectual markers, like "stop" in En-glish, and durative adverbials (e.g., "The cat ate 

kibble for thirty seconds .") are both strong indica-tors for Endeavor as they took place for a period of time then ended, likely without completion. 

Activity. The Activity aspect covers processes that do not start or end during the time window in question. They can be ongoing with respect to present or past time (e.g., “The cat was playing 

the piano.”) For an example graph, see Figure 1. Identifying Activity is difficult because it is largely dependent upon context, document creation time, and real world knowledge. However, there are some grammatical clues that can help one put to-gether the puzzle. For example, if the event is in the present progressive (e.g., "The cat is playing 

the piano."), it is typically annotated with Activity .Inceptive and continuative aspectual markers may also imply that an event has not ended (e.g., "The cat started playing the piano." and "The cat kept on playing the piano."). 

Habitual. The Habitual aspectual sense is usually straightforward to identify. It covers things that happen repeatedly or regularly. One hallmark, in English, are phrases such as “used to” and “always” modifying the verb. Note that Habitual 

does not require these cue phrases–as in the next example. [4] The cat eats kibble.         

> (w/ eat-01 :ARG0 (c/ cat :ref-number Singular) :ARG1 (k/ kibble) :aspect Habitual :modstr FullAff)

In English, Habitual is often expressed through simple present construction, while the past is often done with "used to" (e.g., "The cat used to eat 

kibble."). 

Process. This aspect is the most coarse-grained label available for English. It describes an ongoing event where the beginning or end is uncertain or unspecified. The most common use of Process is as the default label for event nominalizations (e.g., "The cat denied wrongdoing ."). [5] After the game, the cat slept.            

> (s/ sleep-01 :ARG0 (c/ cat :ref-number Singular) :temporal (a/ after :op1 (g/ game :aspect Process)) :aspect State :modstr FullAff)

Graph [5] shows another category of events typ-ically annotated with Process in UMR. Here, the 

game event is packaged in a referring expression. We take a similar approach for underived nominals, nominalizations, and gerunds. 

## 3.3. Comparison to Other Aspect Annotation Schemata 

Aspect annotation has been widely studied in lin-guistics, and UMR represents a recent schema that builds on prior theoretical work. In particular, UMR follows approaches such as Croft (2012), which em-phasize that aspectual interpretation depends on multiple factors and that a single event may admit multiple plausible aspectual readings depending on context. This perspective informed our adjudication process when resolving difficult cases. Because our task is motivated by downstream NLP and machine learning applications, our anno-tation process follows principles outlined by Puste-jovsky et al. (2017). We prioritize consistency in label assignment in order to maximize the learnable signal in the dataset, even when this means limiting the number of annotated examples. Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 2, the selected aspect labels differ in granularity, which introduces variation in specificity across the dataset. Prior work such as the DIASPORA dataset (Kober et al., 2020) also explores aspect annotation but employs a more coarse-grained 3-label schema (state , telic , atelic ) to reduce label overlap and main-tain uniform granularity. Our dataset instead adopts the richer UMR aspect inventory while remaining compatible with prior work. To illustrate this com-patibility, we developed a mapping between our schema and the DIASPORA labels and automat-ically applied it to a subset of our data, manually evaluating the resulting label assignments. We found that the two schemata are broadly compati-ble, excepting the case of event nominals, which take process labels in UMR but are without a con-sistent equivalent in DIASPORA, requiring manual adjudication rather than automated label mapping. 

# 4. Building the Corpus 

## 4.1. Data 

Our dataset is sourced from the UMR 2.0 Dataset (Bonn et al., 2025) which contains roughly 30k UMR graphs in different stages of conversion from AMR graphs (Knight et al., 2020; Bonn et al., 2020). Some UMR 2.0 graphs have aspect annotations from previous work; we annotate graphs that do not yet have aspect labels. To ensure broad coverage for training and evaluation, we select four corpora from the dataset to annotate: 1. The Little Prince corpus, a set of sentences from the English translation of The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. 2. The Minecraft corpus, a set of dialogues and corresponding grounding data from a collaborative structure-building task in Minecraft (Narayan-Chen et al., 2019). 3. The BOLT DF corpus, which contains English-language forum posts crawled as part of the DARPA BOLT project. 4. The Weblog corpus, comprised of weblog and online news articles. A detailed summary of aspect label statistics by corpora for the existing UMR dataset can be found in Appendix A under Table 4. 

## 4.2. Annotation 

Annotation proceeded in two phases: in Phase 1 , a team of 8 annotators worked in pairs to label each event from the partially-converted AMR graphs in bulk. In Phase 2 , a smaller group focused on adju-dicating decision ties with expert consultation, while ensuring consistency with previous annotations. 

4.2.1. Phase 1 

Given the complexity of aspect annotation and its theoretical underpinnings, we determined that all members of the team should first develop a strong understanding of the UMR aspect schema, be-fore proceeding to the bulk annotation of Phase 1 .Our goals were to ensure that each annotator con-tributed quality data and that rules were applied consistently between annotators. To this end, we conducted 8 weekly training sessions throughout 

Phase 1 .Annotation guidelines and training materials were built from existing UMR resources and de-veloped into task-specific training materials. 1 Each week, team members presented on different top-ics from these materials and discussed example annotations as a group to clarify issues. 2

We conducted an initial practice task in which each team member annotated up to 50 predicates from the Pear Story corpus (Bonn et al., 2023a). This dataset was selected for its short, visually  

> 1See Table 5 in Appendix B for more details.
> 2Annotation education material: https://drive. google.com/drive/folders/1_ou3WW4UV7gQHt glMTEbu4TlTbO5xdHt?usp=share_link

grounded sentences, which aided learning and fa-cilitated discussion. We reviewed inter-annotator agreement and recurring errors on the practice task before proceeding to bulk annotation. Label-wise accuracy showed that some cate-gories such as State and Performance were more reliably identified, while minority classes like En-deavor and Habitual were less consistent. These findings guided a focused error correction in which we reviewed common sources of confusion, such as distinctions between State vs. Performance and 

Performance vs. Endeavor .Following the practice task with the Pear Story corpus, we moved into full-scale corpus annotation. Each sub-corpus was assigned to two annotators for independent labeling, resulting in two first-pass labels per event per corpus. Each numbered predi-cate within the AMR graphs was annotated with one of the six UMR aspect labels or marked with NONE 

if the predicate was deemed non-eventive. The 

NONE label was frequently used for adjectival or adverbial concepts, which often receive automatic FrameNet mappings in AMR (in order to provide conceptual context) but do not participate in even-tualities. Table 1 shows the distribution of aspect labels for the completed dataset. The first-pass bulk annotation lasted approximately 6 weeks. 

4.2.2. Phase 2 

Following Phase 1 , all events with conflicting as-pect labels were routed to a tie-breaking process. Each sentence and its annotations were reviewed by a third annotator to make a final determination. If the adjudicating annotator disagreed with both original labels, the sentence went to an additional adjudication step, up to a maximum of 5 total anno-tation rounds. All intermediate labels are preserved and ranked in our final dataset, along with the final adjudicated labels. 3

In the next step, a team of two annotators re-viewed all data for consistency. Together, the tie-breaking and consistency adjudication lasted about 8 weeks. This review process ensured each adjudi-cated aspect label: (i) follows our annotation guide-lines, and (ii) is consistent with other instances in the dataset. To confirm consistency of a given la-bel, we compared against both sentences with the same event, and events with the same label. The duration and complexity of this annotation process indicates the corresponding complexity of aspect itself; even with months of discussion, some instances in the dataset remained ambiguous. For particularly complex disagreements—such as dif-ferentiating Endeavor from Performance —we con-sulted directly with external experts to align the                          

> 3In Appendix B, Table 8 shows the error rates for each label and the most commonly mistaken aspect labels.
> Per-class Label Kα ∗Count
> None 0.735 514 State 0.706 385 Performance 0.716 360 Process 0.547 100 Habitual 0.704 56 Activity 0.502 40 Endeavor 0.559 18
> Total 1,473 Overall
> Percent agreement 74.1% Cohen’s κ0.656 Krippendorff’s α0.688 Fleiss’ κ†0.146

Table 1: Aspect label distribution and inter-annotator agreement metrics. *Per-class Krippen-dorff’s alpha computed as one-vs-rest. †Fleiss’ κ

restricted to the 333 events that received first-pass tie-breaks. annotations with their interpretations. 

## 4.3. Inter-Annotator Agreement 

We report agreement metrics across the various phases of our annotation and adjudication process, compared against our finalized gold-level labels in Table 1. Overall agreement represents the per-centage of events where both first-pass annotators provided the same label for an event, though this does not necessarily mean that such events were exempt from adjudication later. Cohen’s κ is com-puted over all first-pass annotations, as another metric of agreement during Phase 1 . Krippendorff’s 

α compares all 5 rounds of tie-breaks (ignoring missing values where tie-breaking wasn’t needed), meaning it best captures the agreement of all an-notators as a group across both phases. We report Fleiss’ κ, which allows for 3 or more annotators, for the events which moved from Phase 1 (first-pass annotation) to Phase 2 (adjudication) due to a label discrepancy between the two first-pass annotators and required a tie-breaker. 

# 5. Annotation Challenges 

In Table 2 we present examples representative of particularly ambiguous annotation cases. Many of these issues stem from the limited contextual infor-mation available to annotators, as sentences were presented individually rather than as part of com-plete documents. In naturally occurring discourse, surrounding context typically resolves such ambigu-ities, and aspectual interpretation is no exception. For instance, in Table 2 example (a), the event Sentence Event Main label 2nd label (a) <Architect> now above that place red blocks on the grid. Place Performance Process (b) "Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed him. Clap Endeavor Performance (c) Greed is when you are wealthy and lobby your representa-tives for special tax breaks because you are over 60 years of age. Age State N/A Table 2: Selected examples with ambiguous aspect; some annotated with secondary labels. suggests a Process label in the sentence context, since the speaker specifies no explicit number of blocks, and the event lacks an inherent endpoint. However, the wider discourse context (blocksworld video game) includes a particular number of red blocks available to the players, and a finite grid on which to place them, which instead motivates a 

Performance label. Similarly, in example (b), contextual cues could determine whether an event is an Endeavor or a Performance , depending on whether we under-stand "clap" as a process without change of state (hands end up as they started), or a complete event that reaches a natural conclusion (hands start apart and end together in a single motion). Without sur-rounding document context, we cannot say for sure which type of clap this sentence describes. To account for multiple plausible interpretations, our adjudication schema allows for the identifica-tion of a secondary label that reflects a reasonable alternative reading, even when a primary label is se-lected based on the most likely interpretation. For events without such ambiguity such as example (c), we provide only one adjudicated label. 

# 6. Automatic Annotation 

One goal of this annotation effort is to build training and evaluation data for automatic aspect classi-fication. Toward that end, we establish standard data splits and evaluate the performance of several baseline models. 

## 6.1. Data splits 

We establish standardized splits of our final dataset in a 70/15/15 train/val/test ratio, as illustrated in Ta-ble 7, found in Appendix C. We split the data on sentence boundaries, rather than by event, to en-sure that no contextual information is shared across splits, since a single sentence may include multiple events, and sentential context seen in training for one event could unfairly inform test performance on another. We stratified each split to ensure consis-tent and balanced class distribution. To accomplish this, we first identify a dominant aspect class for each sentence, by counting the most frequent la-bel across all events per sentence. For sentences with just one event or whose events all have dif-ferent labels, we consider the first event’s label to be dominant. We perform an initial 70/30 split of the sentences, keeping the label distribution of both consistent with those of the overall dataset. We do the same for the secondary division on the 30% split, producing comparable validation and test splits. 

## 6.2. Baseline models 

To establish a performance baseline for this task on this data set, we test on two types of models: 1) open-source and closed LLMs under a simple prompting paradigm; and 2) a simple feedforward neural architecture. 

LLM Prompting. We experiment with multiple LLMs in a prompting paradigm to evaluate their ca-pability for aspect classification without fine-tuning. LLM performance on structured prediction tasks has been shown to vary drastically based on slight changes to prompt structure (Lu et al., 2022), and other work suggests that LLMs lack meta-linguistic reasoning capability (Bonn et al., 2024b); we exam-ine the ability of LLMs to identify covert aspectual information from a sentence, as well as produce a baseline against which to compare other neu-ral approaches in the future. Although finding the optimal prompt for this task is intractable, we first ran a preliminary search across different prompt strategies on a validation set to determine if any of them boosts aspect prediction performance sig-nificantly. 4 We found minimal differences between prompt styles, and proceeded to the test phase. Our tests compare Llama-3.1-8b-instruct 

(Grattafiori et al., 2024) and GPT-5mini . We ex-periment with few-shot in-context learning using 3 examples per label (21 examples per prompt). 

Feedforward Classifier. We investigate the abil-ity of LLM encoder layers to capture representations that may be useful for aspect classification based                                             

> 4Details of the prompt-tuning experiments available in Appendix C Type Model Acc. Macro F1 Wtd. F1 Precision Recall
> LLM LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (zero-shot) 0.31 0.19 0.27 0.29 0.24 LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (3-shot) 0.25 0.16 0.22 0.32 0.21 GPT-5mini (zero-shot) 0.56 0.49 0.56 0.69 0.49 GPT-5mini (3-shot) 0.56 0.46 0.60 0.49 0.46 Neural Feedforward MLP 0.45 0.27 0.44 0.29 0.32 Symbolic AutoAspect †0.39 0.23 0.40 ——Human First annotator 0.84 0.76 0.84 0.77 0.82

Table 3: Baseline results on the test split (254 events, 72 sentences). Human performance reflects first-pass annotator accuracy against adjudicated gold labels. Precision and Recall are macro averages across classes. †AutoAspect results are taken from the original publication and are not directly comparable. on the hypothesis that contextual embeddings en-code a broad range of linguistic phenomena (Arora et al., 2024). We do this by combining the token embeddings of the input sentence with a simple feedforward neural classifier to produce a label pre-diction from the text alone via supervised training. To evaluate the usefulness of LLM embeddings out-of-the-box, we pass the natural language sen-tence through the encoder block of Llama-3.1 8B and average the resulting token embeddings to generate a sentence vector with standardized di-mensions, then use a simple feedforward classifier head to produce a label prediction. We use the same averaged embedding as input for each event in the sentence. We train a fully-connected feed-forward network to predict one of the seven aspect labels using that embedding as input. The results from this method serve as a useful benchmark for evaluating more complex strategies in future work. 

## 6.3. Automatic Modeling Results 

Table 3 displays the accuracies and F1-scores across the two LLMs and the feedforward neural classifier. We report weighted F1, average preci-sion, and average recall; to address the imbalanced label distribution in the data, we also report macro F1. We evaluate all methods on the same strati-fied test set. The table also shows reported results for AutoAspect (Chen et al., 2021b), a rule-based approach to UMR aspect classification. Note that the reported results are on a different test set, so these serve as a general reference for rule-based approaches rather than a direct comparison. Fi-nally, we show annotation agreement scores as an upper bound for the task. 

LLM Prompting. The dataset’s significant imbal-ance, with State and NONE labels being dominant and many classes being rare, heavily influences the results. Performance on minority classes like En-deavor is weak regardless of the prompt or model, suggesting that neither prompt engineering nor in-creased parameter count can overcome severe data sparsity. Weighted F1 scores are skewed by the majority class, while lower macro F1 scores accurately reflect poor performance across most categories. GPT-5mini outperforms Llama across all metrics, which we attribute to architectural up-dates, including advanced knowledge distillation. GPT-5mini performance is relatively indifferent to in-context examples, while Llama’s performance actu-ally decreases with the addition of in-context learn-ing, suggesting that more comprehensive training is needed for aspect prediction. 

Feedforward Classifier. Neural classification us-ing Llama embeddings results in middling perfor-mance, coming short in all three evaluation metrics compared to LLM prompting methods. Although sentence embeddings have been seen to capture semantic information in other tasks, these results demonstrate that embeddings alone are insufficient for capturing aspectual information. 

Human Baseline. Across the board, our human baseline outperforms all automated aspect annota-tion methods tested. The human baseline scores represent one annotator’s first-pass labels for each of the events in the test set, compared against the final adjudicated labels. The overwhelming suc-cess of the human annotator over the automated baselines confirms two things: (i), the complexity of the aspect annotation task, and (ii), the need for automated methods which better utilize the senten-tial context and/or the inherent graphical nature of event-argument structures. 

# 7. Conclusion and Future Work 

In this work, we introduce a new dataset of En-glish sentences annotated with aspect labels within the UMR framework. We describe the annotation scheme and guidelines used to assign aspectual categories from the UMR aspect lattice and detail our multi-stage annotation and adjudication pro-cess. We establish initial baseline benchmarks using rule-based methods, embedding-based clas-sifiers, and large language model prompting ap-proaches. The guidelines, dataset, standard data splits, and initial benchmarks together lay a foun-dation for studying aspect in structured semantic representations and will support future work on au-tomated UMR parsing and cross-linguistic semantic annotation. 

# Ethical Considerations 

This work builds on existing publicly available cor-pora that were previously released for research purposes. Our dataset adds aspectual annotations to sentences drawn from these sources in accor-dance with their respective licenses. Annotation was conducted by trained researchers who are au-thors of this paper. Because the dataset focuses on English sen-tences, it representatively only reflects informa-tion about English-language corpora and does not directly capture aspectual distinctions present in other languages. Future work will expand this anno-tation framework to additional languages in order to support broader cross-linguistic semantic analysis. We do not anticipate significant risks of misuse for this dataset. However, some of the examples in our corpus were pulled from online message fora without censoring, and may contain offensive, explicit, or harmful language. The resource is in-tended to support research in semantic represen-tation and natural language processing. 

# Limitations 

We attempted to reimplement the AutoAspect rules-based classifier (Chen et al., 2021a) on our novel set of annotated UMR graphs in order to compare its performance against the neural approaches as a benchmark. AutoAspect focuses on a structured set of rules which closely followed the UMR an-notation guidelines and decision lattice to predict labels in a wholly deterministic method, without machine learning. However, due to dependency issues with the semantic parser in the original Au-toAspect codebase, we are unable to report this benchmark on our dataset, and instead provide the AutoAspect classifier’s performance on the dataset with which it was published, as a reference for rule-based approaches in general. 

# 8. Bibliographical References 

Aryaman Arora, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. 2024. CausalGym: Benchmarking causal interpretability methods on linguistic tasks. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14638–14663, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Emmon Bach. 1986. The algebra of events. Lin-guistics and philosophy , pages 5–16. Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning rep-resentation for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th linguistic annotation workshop and inter-operability with discourse , pages 178–186. Julia Bonn, Claire Bonial, Matt Buchholz, Hsiao-Jung Cheng, Alvin Chen, Ching-wen Chen, An-drew Cowell, William Croft, Lukas Denk, Ahmed Elsayed, Eva Fučíková, Federica Gamba, Carlos Gomez, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jiří Havelka, Lo-den Havenmeier, Ath Kilgore, Veronika Kolářová, Lucie Kučová, Kenneth Lai, Bin Li, Jingyi Li, Markéta Lopatková, Marie MacGregor, Marie Mikulová, Jiří Mírovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Skatje Myers, Michal Novák, Tim O’Gorman, Petr Pajas, Alexis Palmer, Martha Palmer, Jarmila Panevová, Benét Post, James Pustejovsky, Petr Sgall, Jialin Song, Li Song, Magda Ševčíková, Jan Štěpánek, Zdeňka Urešová, Haibo Sun, Yao Sun, Rosa Vallejos Yopán, Jens Van Gysel, Mea-gan Vigus, Kristin Wright - Bettner, Jiawei Wu, Ni-anwen Xue, Dan Xing, Keer Xu, Zhixing Xu, Liulu Yue, Daniel Zeman, Jin Zhao, Šárka Zikánová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2025. Uniform meaning representation 2.0. LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digi-tal library at the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics (ÚFAL). Julia Bonn, Matthew J Buchholz, Jayeol Chun, An-drew Cowell, William Croft, Lukas Denk, Sijia Ge, Jan Hajic, Kenneth Lai, James H Martin, et al. 2024a. Building a broad infrastructure for uni-form meaning representations. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 2537–2547. Julia Bonn, Chen Ching-wen, James Andrew Cow-ell, William Croft, Lukas Denk, Jan Hajič, Ken-neth Lai, Martha Palmer, Alexis Palmer, James Pustejovsky, Haibo Sun, Rosa Vallejos Yopán, Jens Van Gysel, Meagan Vigus, Nianwen Xue, and Jin Zhao. 2023a. Uniform meaning repre-sentation. LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digital library at the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguis-tics (ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University. Julia Bonn, Skatje Myers, Jens E. L. Van Gysel, Lukas Denk, Meagan Vigus, Jin Zhao, Andrew Cowell, William Croft, Jan Hajič, James H. Mar-tin, Alexis Palmer, Martha Palmer, James Puste-jovsky, Zdenka Urešová, Rosa Vallejos, and Ni-anwen Xue. 2023b. Mapping AMR to UMR: Re-sources for adapting existing corpora for cross-lingual compatibility. In Proceedings of the 21st International Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-guistic Theories (TLT, GURT/SyntaxFest 2023) ,pages 74–95, Washington, D.C. Association for Computational Linguistics. Julia Bonn, Martha Palmer, Zheng Cai, and Kristin Wright-Bettner. 2020. Spatial AMR: Expanded spatial annotation in the context of a grounded Minecraft corpus. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-ence , pages 4883–4892, Marseille, France. Eu-ropean Language Resources Association. Julia Bonn, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Jena D. Hwang, and Claire Bonial. 2024b. Adjudicating LLMs as PropBank adjudicators. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Design-ing Meaning Representations @ LREC-COLING 2024 , pages 112–123, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Nancy Chang, Daniel Gildea, and Srini Narayanan. 2022. A dynamic model of aspectual composi-tion. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual con-ference of the cognitive science society , pages 226–231. Routledge. Daniel Chen, Martha Palmer, and Meagan Vigus. 2021a. AutoAspect: Automatic annotation of tense and aspect for uniform meaning represen-tations. In Proceedings of the Joint 15th Linguis-tic Annotation Workshop (LAW) and 3rd Design-ing Meaning Representations (DMR) Workshop ,pages 36–45, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Daniel Chen, Martha Palmer, and Meagan Vigus. 2021b. Autoaspect: automatic annotation of tense and aspect for uniform meaning represen-tations. In Proceedings of The Joint 15th Linguis-tic Annotation Workshop (LAW) and 3rd Design-ing Meaning Representations (DMR) Workshop .Jayeol Chun and Nianwen Xue. 2024. Uniform meaning representation parsing as a pipelined approach. In Proceedings of TextGraphs-17: Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 40–52, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Bernard Comrie. 1976. Aspect cambridge univer-sity press. William Croft. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and causal structure . OUP Oxford. Leon RA Derczynski. 2017. Automatically ordering events and times in text . Springer. Lucia Donatelli, Michael Regan, William Croft, and Nathan Schneider. 2018. Annotation of tense and aspect semantics for sentential amr. In Proceed-ings of the Joint Workshop on Linguistic Annota-tion, Multiword Expressions and Constructions (LAW-MWE-CxG-2018) , pages 96–108. Lucia Donatelli, Nathan Schneider, William Croft, and Michael Regan. 2019. Tense and aspect semantics for sentential amr. Society for Com-putation in Linguistics , 2(1). David R Dowty. 1986. The effects of aspectual class on the temporal structure of discourse: seman-tics or pragmatics? Linguistics and philosophy ,pages 37–61. Annemarie Friedrich and Alexis Palmer. 2014. Au-tomatic prediction of aspectual class of verbs in context. Annemarie Friedrich, Alexis Palmer, and Manfred Pinkal. 2016. Situation entity types: automatic classification of clause-level aspect. In Proceed-ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1757–1768. Annemarie Friedrich, Nianwen Xue, and Alexis Palmer. 2023. A kind introduction to lexical and grammatical aspect, with a survey of computa-tional approaches. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 599– 622, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. William Gantt, Lelia Glass, and Aaron Steven White. 2021. Decomposing and recomposing event structure. CoRR , abs/2103.10387. William Gantt, Lelia Glass, and Aaron Steven White. 2022. Decomposing and recomposing event structure. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:17–34. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ah-mad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Can-ton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choud-hary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Di-nan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Fran-cisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Han-nah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kar-tikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Lau-rens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Has-san, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bash-lykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Va-sic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Sil-veira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabas-appa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun So-nia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sha-ran Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Her-man, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Geor-giou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Wei-wei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiao-fang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xin-feng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Al-varado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ram-chandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowd-hury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, As-saf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paran-jape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Han-cock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Sto-jkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Chang-han Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tin-dal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Da-mon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Di-dem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Hol-land, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Mont-gomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Moly-bog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Ge-boski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shep-ard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Ma-dian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Moham-mad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini San-thanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Re-bekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-tadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudar-shan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Sub-ramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Vic-toria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Ku-mar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Klein-man, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary De-Vito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Erhard Hinrichs. 1986. Temporal anaphora in dis-courses of english. Linguistics and philosophy ,pages 63–82. Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. Prop-bank: the next level of treebank. In Proceedings of Treebanks and lexical Theories , volume 3. Cite-seer. Wolfgang Klein. 2013. Time in language . Rout-ledge. Kevin Knight, Bianca Badarau, Laura Baranescu, Claire Bonial, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Daniel Marcu, Tim O’Gorman, Martha Palmer, Nathan Schneider, and Madalina Bardocz. 2020. Ab-stract meaning representation (AMR) annotation release 3.0. Thomas Kober, Malihe Alikhani, Matthew Stone, and Mark Steedman. 2020. Aspectuality across genre: A distributional semantics approach. In 

Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 4546–4562, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Commit-tee on Computational Linguistics. Ronald W Langacker. 2011. Remarks on english aspect. In Tense-aspect: Between semantics & pragmatics , pages 265–304. John Benjamins Publishing Company. Egoitz Laparra, Dongfang Xu, and Steven Bethard. 2018. From characters to time intervals: New paradigms for evaluation and neural parsing of time normalizations. Transactions of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics , 6:343–356. Charles N Li and Sandra A Thompson. 1989. Man-darin Chinese: A functional reference grammar .Univ of California Press. Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2022. Fantasti-cally ordered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In 

Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Betsy Hicks McDonald. 1982. Aspects of the Amer-ican Sign Language predicate system . State University of New York at Buffalo. Marc Moens and Mark Steedman. 1988. Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational linguistics , 14(2):15–28. Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Alyson Grealish, Nathanael Chambers, James Allen, and Lucy Vanderwende. 2016. Caters: Causal and temporal relation scheme for semantic annotation of event struc-tures. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Events , pages 51–61. Anjali Narayan-Chen, Prashant Jayannavar, and Julia Hockenmaier. 2019. Collaborative dialogue in Minecraft. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 5405–5415, Florence, Italy. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Tim O’Gorman, Kristin Wright-Bettner, and Martha Palmer. 2016. Richer event description: Integrat-ing event coreference with temporal, causal and bridging annotation. In Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on computing news storylines (CNS 2016) , pages 47–56. Barbara H Partee. 2011. Nominal and temporal semantic structure. In Prague Linguistic Circle Papers: Travaux du cercle linguistique de Prague nouvelle série. Volume 3 , pages 91–108. John Benjamins Publishing Company. James Pustejovsky, Harry Bunt, and Annie Zaenen. 2017. Designing annotation schemes: From the-ory to model. Handbook of Linguistic Annotation ,pages 21–72. James Pustejovsky, José M Castano, Robert In-gria, Roser Sauri, Robert J Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Graham Katz, and Dragomir R Radev. 2003. Timeml: Robust specification of event and temporal expressions in text. New directions in question answering , 3:28–34. Hans Reichenbach. 1947. Elements of symbolic logic. Haibo Sun, Nianwen Xue, Jin Zhao, Liulu Yue, Yao Sun, Keer Xu, and Jiawei Wu. 2024. Chi-nese UMR annotation: Can LLMs help? In Pro-ceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations @ LREC-COLING 2024 , pages 131–139, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Jens EL Van Gysel, Meagan Vigus, Jayeol Chun, Kenneth Lai, Sarah Moeller, Jiarui Yao, Tim O’Gorman, Andrew Cowell, William Croft, Chu-Ren Huang, et al. 2021. Designing a uniform meaning representation for natural language pro-cessing. KI-Künstliche Intelligenz , 35(3):343– 360. Herman Van Olphen. 1975. Aspect, tense, and mood in the hindi verb. Indo-Iranian Journal ,16(4):284–301. Z Vendler. 1967. Linguistics in philosophy ithaca, ny: Cornell univ. Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and times. The philo-sophical review , 66(2):143–160. 

# 9. Appendix A - Data Statistics and Dataset Splits 

Table 4 shows general statistics for aspect-labeled UMR data prior to this annotation project. Table 5 shows distributions and counts at the end of Phase 1 annotation, before Phase 2 adjudication. Table 7 provides statistics for our dataset splits. Precise Sentence IDs for the splits will be avail-able on our github (once anonymity is no longer required). 

# 10. Appendix B - Annotation 

Training materials are primarily drawn from exist-ing UMR tutorial materials and supplemented with custom task-specific resources, including an ac-cessible slide deck 5 which summarizes the UMR guidelines 6 with added clarifications and examples. Table 6 shows the results from the Pear Story practice annotation task. Due to the different num-ber of annotations each person performed, we re-port Gwet’s AC1 as a measure for inter-annotator agreement (IAA) since this metric can be calculated for different numbers of labels. We report Fleiss’ Kappa only for predicates that were labeled by all annotators. We find moderate-to-good IAA for the practice round, motivating the need for additional training that was conducted. Figure 3 illustrates the flow of data through the two phases of corpus building, including multiple rounds of tie-breaking. The 143 events listed as single-annotated in the first-pass were part of a teaching demonstration, but they did ultimately re-ceive second annotations and were reviewed for consistency during adjudication; this detail was omitted from the diagram for visual clarity. 

# 11. Appendix C - Modeling 

In this Appendix we provide additional information on the automatic aspect modeling design and re-sults. 

> 5https://docs.google.com/presentation /d/1QUAnh2LWlgfvp_0NAj7K-YEdAbjG7zXmCLfE q0sfoa0/edit?usp=sharing
> 6https://github.com/umr4nlp/umr-guide lines/blob/master/guidelines.md

Aspect Little Prince Minecraft BOLT DF WB Pear Story Lorelei UMR 1.0 Total State 63 20 119 45 121 0 62 430 

Habitual 1 0 17 4 28 0 2 52 

Process 2 0 5 5 44 1 1 58 

Activity 9 0 31 14 57 0 21 132 

Performance 35 2 43 18 159 3 57 317 

Endeavor 0 0 0 0 2 0 14 16 

Total 110 22 215 86 411 4 157 1005 

Table 4: Aspect label distribution from existing UMR data before any additional annotation was done. 

Aspect Little Prince Minecraft BOLT DF WB Existing Labels Total 

State 172 14 101 14 430 731 

Habitual 41 0 4 0 52 97 

Process 31 0 38 8 58 135 

Activity 15 2 10 3 132 162 

Performance 163 43 69 32 317 624 

Endeavor 15 0 4 0 16 35 

None 158 49 121 77 - 405 

Total 595 108 347 134 1, 005 2, 189 

Fleiss’ Kappa 0.78 0.82 0.45 0.40 - -Table 5: Label distribution by corpus and annotated aspect. We report Fleiss’ Kappa between the two initial annotators and do not include disagreements in the reported total. Category Metric Value Accuracy State 0.82 

Habitual 0.63 

Activity 0.52 

Performance 0.80 

Endeavor 0.11 

Overall Accuracy 0.74 

Perfect Accuracy 0.35 

F1 Macro F1 0.49 

Weighted Macro F1 0.76 

IAA Fleiss’ Kappa 0.55 

Gwet’s AC1 0.66 

Table 6: Practice Annotation Results: Overall Ac-curacy is the ratio of the total number of correct annotations over the total number of predicates an-notated. Perfect Accuracy is the ratio of predicates that were correctly annotated by all annotators. No occurrences of Process aspects were present in the practice set. 

LLM Prompt Tuning. We try three strategies to gauge the impact of prompt structure on LLM per-formance: Initially, we manually draft a list of short definitions for each aspect class based on the expe-rience gained from our annotator training sessions. In a second prompt attempt, we provide the initial prompt and instruct the model to generate a bet-ter prompt for our task, to investigate if the LLM’s pretraining contains aspectual knowledge beyond           

> Split Sentences Events
> Train 333 999 Dev 71 220 Test 72 254
> Total 476 1,473

Table 7: Stratified 70/15/15 train/dev/test split, di-vided at the sentence level using dominant aspect label for stratification. Gold label Error rate Error Label Activity 6.7% Performance Endeavor 12.2% Performance Habitual 6.8% Performance None 6.0% State Performance 3.9% None Process 9.1% None State 4.8% None Table 8: Final gold labels and the percent for each that was incorrectly annotated then fixed during adjudication out of the total number of annotations for that label. The error label is the most common incorrect annotation. our basic definitions, which resulted in a stream-lined version with more general task instruction. Finally, to take advantage of extensive LLM context windows, we try providing the UMR guidelines for Figure 3: Flow diagram illustrating the annotation and adjudication phases, and how many labels were completed at each stage of the process. aspect 7 in their entirety and instructing the model to predict a label. We find marginally higher vali-dation accuracy with strategy 2, and employ it in testing.