Title: OntoKG: Ontology-Oriented Knowledge Graph Construction with Intrinsic-Relational Routing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02618v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:17:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# ONTO KG: O NTOLOGY -O RIENTED KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 

# CONSTRUCTION WITH INTRINSIC -R ELATIONAL ROUTING 

Yitao Li 

ProRata.ai 

yitao@prorata.ai ∗

Zhanlin Liu ProRata.ai 

zhanlin@prorata.ai ∗

Anuranjan Pandey ProRata.ai 

anuranjan@prorata.ai 

Muni Srikanth ProRata.ai 

srikanth@prorata.ai 

# ABSTRACT 

Organizing a large-scale knowledge graph into a typed property graph requires structural decisions— which entities become nodes, which properties become edges, and what schema governs these choices. Existing approaches embed these decisions in pipeline code (YAGO, DBpedia) or extract relations ad hoc (LLM-based pipelines), producing schemas that are tightly coupled to their construction process and difficult to reuse for downstream ontology-level tasks. We present an ontology-oriented approach to knowledge graph construction: one in which the schema is designed from the outset for ontology analysis, entity disambiguation, domain customization, and LLM-guided extraction—not merely as a byproduct of graph building. The core mechanism is intrinsic-relational routing , which classifies every property as either intrinsic (a node attribute for lookup, e.g., birth date) or relational 

(a traversable graph edge, e.g., employer), and routes it to the corresponding schema module. This routing produces a declarative schema that is portable across storage backends and independently reusable. We instantiate the approach on the January 2026 Wikidata dump (about 100 M items). A rule-based cleaning stage identifies a 34.6 M-entity core set from the full dump, followed by iterative intrinsic-relational routing that assigns each property to one of 94 modules (56 intrinsic, 38 relational) organized into 8 categories. With tool-augmented LLM support and human review, the schema reaches 93.3% category coverage on the core set and 98.0% module assignment among classified entities. Exporting this schema yields a property graph with 34.0 M nodes and 61.2 M edges across 38 relationship types. We validate the ontology-oriented claim through five applications that consume the schema independently of the construction pipeline: ontology structure analysis, benchmark annotation auditing, entity disambiguation (+2.4-point macro gain over YAGO 4.5 on the controlled-candidate subset of BLINK), domain customization, and LLM-guided extraction. 

Keywords knowledge graph · property graph · schema engineering · entity classification · Wikidata · agentic workflow 

# 1 Introduction 

Knowledge graphs have become a foundational structure for organizing information, from domain-specific applications to world-scale knowledge bases. Among these, Wikidata stands as one of the largest collaborative knowledge graphs, containing over 100 million entities contributed by a global community of editors [ 1]. However, Wikidata’s open editing model, while enabling broad coverage, comes at a cost: entity types are unconstrained, property usage is inconsistent, and no relationship schema is enforced. The result is a raw, semi-structured knowledge graph that is rich in content but difficult to query, analyze, or integrate into downstream applications at scale. Several projects have sought to impose structure on Wikidata. DBpedia [ 2] and YAGO 4.5 [ 3 ] extract and organize Wikidata content into cleaner ontological frameworks. However, these efforts focus on ontology alignment—mapping Wikidata into existing type hierarchies—rather than producing a schema that is itself designed for ontology-level 

> ∗

These authors contributed equally to this work Code and schema available at https://github.com/Prorata-ai/OntoKG 

> arXiv:2604.02618v1 [cs.AI] 3 Apr 2026

Figure 1: Overview of the schema-centered knowledge graph ecosystem. A raw knowledge graph (left) is transformed through an intrinsic-relational classification framework into a typed property graph (right). The declarative schema (center) serves as the core artifact, enabling downstream applications including entity disambiguation, domain cus-tomization, and LLM-guided extraction. applications such as structural analysis, entity disambiguation, or domain-specific subgraph extraction. Meanwhile, LLM-constructed knowledge graphs face the same disorder: recent pipelines extract entities and relations from unstructured text at scale, but the resulting graphs have ad hoc entity types, unconstrained relation vocabularies, and no shared schema governing what is extracted or how it is organized. What is missing is an ontology-oriented approach: one in which the schema is constructed with ontology applications in mind, so that the resulting artifact is not merely a side effect of graph building but a first-class resource for downstream tasks. Such a schema must be comprehensive in coverage, modular enough to support domain customization, and portable across storage backends—properties that existing pipeline-coupled schemas lack. This paper operationalizes this approach through intrinsic-relational routing , a methodology that classifies every property as either intrinsic or relational and routes it to the corresponding schema module (Figure 1). Intrinsic modules 

route entity properties to typed tabular attributes suitable for node lookup, while relational modules route properties to graph edges that capture traversable connections. Together, they define the node scope (which entities appear as nodes and what properties attach to them) and the edge boundary (which properties become traversable edges versus scalar attributes). The resulting classification does more than determine graph structure: it also organizes each entity’s raw properties into semantically meaningful modules that support inspection and downstream reuse. The construction process preserves analyzable conceptual structure—explicit categories, reusable modules, principled property routing—while the produced artifact remains a declarative schema rather than a formal OWL/RDF ontology. We demonstrate the methodology on Wikidata, where the data cleaning stage (Section 4.1) identifies approximately two-thirds of the 100 M entities as automated bulk imports—motivating a data cleaning stage before classification. Our contributions are: 1. An ontology-oriented approach for organizing a raw, open-domain knowledge graph into a typed property graph designed for downstream ontology-based applications. 2. Intrinsic-relational routing , a new procedure that constructs a schema and its typed property graph by distinguishing intrinsic attributes from relational connections and routing them to appropriate tabular fields or graph edges. 3. An agentic LLM workflow for iterative schema refinement, where the LLM acts as a schema designer equipped with grounding tools that verify each identifier used in schema decisions against the knowledge graph. 4. A Wikidata case study producing a property graph of 34.0 M nodes and 61.2 M edges with a portable schema of 8 categories and 94 modules, implemented in both Python and Rust. 25. Five downstream applications demonstrating the schema as a first-class artifact: ontology analysis and topic-centered subgraph extraction, benchmark annotation auditing, entity disambiguation (outperforming YAGO 4.5 by 2.4 points on the controlled-candidate subset of BLINK), domain customization, and LLM-guided entity extraction. 

# 2 Related Work 

We situate our contributions within four areas: knowledge graph entity typing, ontology modularization, LLM-based knowledge graph construction, and property graph construction. 

2.1 Entity Typing in Knowledge Graphs 

Existing entity typing systems assign entities to hierarchical type structures. DBpedia [ 2] uses an ontology derived from Wikipedia infobox templates. The YAGO lineage [ 4 , 3] has evolved from WordNet-based typing to YAGO 4.5, which constructs a large-scale typed knowledge graph from Wikidata using schema.org as its type vocabulary. These systems primarily emphasize single-hierarchy classifications: an entity is assigned to one dominant type path. Wikidata-specific entity typing has received growing attention. NECKAr [ 5 ] classifies Wikidata entities into three coarse classes (person, location, organization) using P31 values and graph structure, covering 8 million entities. Zhou et al. [ 6] diagnose inconsistencies in Wikidata’s P31/P279 hierarchy. Our framework differs in two ways. First, it introduces a second classification dimension: alongside category assignment, relational modules capture cross-cutting domain connections (military, finance, education) that span the primary category decomposition. Second, execution is deterministic and traceable given a fixed schema—each assignment follows from specific property values in the schema, requiring no learned models. 

2.2 Ontology Modularization and Faceted Classification 

The theoretical foundations for our two-layer framework draw from three traditions. Guizzardi’s Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [ 7, 8] distinguishes rigid sortals (types essential to an entity’s identity) from roles and mixins 

(contingent, relationally dependent types). Kiczales et al. [ 9 ] identify an analogous pattern in software engineering: 

cross-cutting concerns that cannot be cleanly encapsulated in a single module of a system’s primary decomposition. Ranganathan’s faceted classification [10] decomposes subjects into independent facets rather than forcing them into a single hierarchy; Stuckenschmidt et al. [11] formalize ontology modularization along similar lines. Our intrinsic-relational distinction operationalizes these ideas at scale: intrinsic modules behave like rigid sortals or primary facets (identity-providing, category-confined), while relational modules behave like mixins or cross-cutting concerns (spanning the primary category decomposition). A dominant heuristic—whether a module appears in multiple categories—guides this classification, reducing the degree of philosophical judgment that foundational ontology traditionally requires. 

2.3 LLM-Based Knowledge Graph Construction 

Recent work has applied LLMs to automate knowledge graph construction from unstructured text. Zhang and Soh [ 12 ]propose an extract-define-canonicalize pipeline where LLMs extract entities and relations, define their types, and canonicalize them into a coherent graph. Feng et al. [ 13 ] ground LLM-based KG construction in Wikidata’s schema by generating competency questions, extracting relations, and matching them to Wikidata properties. These approaches use LLMs to build schemas from text—discovering entity types and relations during extraction. Our work takes a complementary approach: we use a pre-built, iteratively refined schema to guide extraction (Section 5.4), providing the LLM with a grounded type taxonomy and tag vocabulary rather than asking it to invent one. A further distinction is the role of the LLM itself. In existing pipelines, the LLM serves as an extractor—consuming text and producing graph triples. In our agentic oracle workflow (Section 4.3), the LLM acts as a schema designer :it investigates unclassified entity types, proposes category and module assignments, and edits the declarative schema files. Grounding tools verify each identifier used in schema decisions against the knowledge graph at decision time, addressing the hallucination problem at its source rather than through post-hoc validation. 32.4 Property Graph Construction 

Several systems address Wikidata processing at scale: the Wikidata Toolkit [ 14 ] provides RDF exports via Java, Fernandez et al. [ 15 ] introduce HDT for compressed RDF querying, and Nguyen and Takeda [ 16 ] build Wikidata-lite using LMDB for offline knowledge extraction. On the formal side, Angles [ 17 ] defines the property graph data model and Angles et al. [ 18 ] prove information-preserving mappings from RDF to property graphs. Hogan et al. [ 19 ] identify hybrid storage—splitting data between graph and tabular engines—as an open challenge. Our pipeline differs from these in three ways. First, we operate on Wikidata’s native JSON dump rather than requiring an RDF processing stack. Second, we perform semantic classification before graph construction, so node labels and edge types are determined by the schema rather than by source structure. Third, the intrinsic-relational framework directly addresses hybrid storage: intrinsic modules produce node attributes for tabular lookup while relational modules produce typed edges for graph traversal, splitting data by access pattern from a single classification pass. 

# 3 Methodology 

This section presents the generic methodology for transforming a raw knowledge graph into a typed property graph with an explicit, reusable schema. The process applies to any knowledge graph whose entities carry class or type assertions and whose facts are organized as entity-attribute-value triples or entity-relationship-entity triples. 

3.1 Declarative Classification Schema 

The schema serves two purposes: it defines how to classify entities and what to extract from them. We represent it as a set of declarative configuration files—one per category—that jointly function as the single source of truth for both classification rules and output structure. Let K = ( E, P, V ) denote a knowledge graph where E is the set of entities, P

the set of properties, and V the set of values (which may themselves be entities). 

Categories and gate matching. The schema partitions entities into k categories {C1, . . . , C k}. Each category Ci is defined by a set of gate values Gi ⊂ V —entity types that trigger membership. An entity e ∈ E is assigned to category 

Ci if any of its type-assertion properties (e.g., instance-of or subclass-of) matches a value in Gi:

category (e) = Ci if ∃ p ∈ Ptype , v ∈ V (e, p ) s.t. v ∈ Gi

where Ptype is the set of type-assertion properties and V (e, p ) denotes the values of property p for entity e. Categories are evaluated in a fixed priority order; the first match wins, ensuring mutual exclusivity: 

∀ e ∈ E, |{ Ci : category (e) = Ci}| ≤ 1 and Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ ∀ i̸ = j

That is, the assigned categories form a partition over classified entities: each classified entity belongs to exactly one category. 

Modules. Within each category Ci, the schema defines a set of named modules Mi that group semantically related properties. Each module m ∈ M i has three fields: • Type τ (m) ∈ { intrinsic , relational }: determines whether the module’s properties are routed to node attributes (for lookup) or graph edges (for traversal). This is the edge boundary decision, made explicitly at schema design time. • Indicators I(m): a set of property-value conditions that trigger module assignment. Each indicator is a pair 

(p, S p) where p ∈ P and Sp ⊆ V . An entity e matches module m if any indicator is satisfied: 

match (e, m ) = _

> (p,S p)∈I(m)

V (e, p )̸ = ∅ if Sp = ∅

V (e, p ) ∩ Sp̸ = ∅ otherwise When Sp = ∅, the indicator is presence-based : the property exists on the entity, regardless of its values. When 

Sp̸ = ∅, the indicator is value-based : the property must contain a value from the specified set. • Value properties Π( m) ⊂ P : the properties extracted for matched entities under this module. For each matched entity e and module m, the output is: 

output (e, m ) = {(p, v ) | p ∈ Π( m), v ∈ V (e, p )}

If τ (m) = intrinsic , each (p, v ) pair becomes a node attribute; if τ (m) = relational and v ∈ E, it becomes a typed edge e m

−→ v in the property graph. 4An entity receives one category, zero or more intrinsic modules, and zero or more relational modules. Intrinsic modules define what an entity is —identity-providing attributes that are typically category-confined (e.g., chemical formula for compounds, birth date for people). Relational modules define what an entity connects to —cross-cutting domains that often span multiple categories (e.g., award , military , religion ). The intrinsic–relational distinction is the default organizing principle; the schema designer may override it via the type assignment τ (m), for example reclassifying a module as relational when its values are entities worth traversing rather than scalar attributes. Taken together, a schema is formally defined as S = {(Ci, G i, Mi)}ki=1 , where each module m ∈ M i carries (τ (m), I (m), Π( m)) .

Illustrative example. Consider Apple Inc. (Q312), whose instance-of (P31) values include enterprise (Q6881511) and business (Q4830453). The gate set Gorganizations contains Q6881511, so: 

∃ p ∈ Ptype , v ∈ V (Q312 , p ) s.t. v ∈ Gorganizations =⇒ category (Q312 ) = Corganizations 

The first category match wins; Apple’s remaining P31 values do not trigger any other category. Once classified, module indicators are evaluated. The corporation module ( τ = intrinsic ) activates because Apple’s P31 values match its value-based indicator set and it possesses P169 (chief executive officer) and P1128 (employees). Its value properties—P1128 (employees), P414 (stock exchange)—become node attributes for lookup; for instance, P1128 records 164,000 employees (as of 2022) and P414 captures listing on Nasdaq with ticker symbol AAPL. The affiliation module ( τ = relational ) activates on properties like P112 (founded by) and P355 (child organization). Because τ (affiliation ) = relational and the values are entities, each becomes a typed edge: e.g., Q312 affiliation 

−−−−−−−→ Q1961036 (Beats Electronics). In total, Apple receives 1 intrinsic module and 8 relational modules, illustrating how a single entity acquires both identity-defining attributes and cross-cutting graph connections. 

3.2 Iterative Schema Refinement 

The schema is not designed in a single pass. It emerges through an iterative refinement loop that alternates between classification and failure analysis. The process begins with a seed schema S0—a small set of gate values, a handful of modules per category, and an initial list of value properties—that reflects the builder’s intent for the target graph. Each round identifies two failure sets: unclassified entities E∅ (no gate match) and no-module entities E¬m (classified but no module activated), then applies three decision oracles to resolve them. Algorithm 1 formalizes the loop. The CANDIDATE TYPES function (line 6) selects type values from E∅ for gate expansion using two criteria: high frequency (types with the most unclassified instances, maximizing coverage gain) and high reference count (types whose entities are heavily referenced by already-classified entities, maximizing graph connectivity even when instance counts are low). In gate–module synchronization, if multiple indicators in I(m)

are eligible, we reuse one on a type-assertion property; if none exists, we create a new value-based indicator. The computational steps—classification, failure partitioning, rate computation—are deterministic and parallelizable. The bottleneck lies in three decision oracles that require semantic judgment: 1. Category oracle δc : V → Ci. Given an unclassified type value, assign it to a category. This drives the gate expansion step. 2. Module oracle δm : V → m ∈ M i. Given a new gate value with no matching indicator, assign it to a module within its category. This enforces the gate–module synchronization invariant ∀ g ∈ Gi, ∃ (p, S p) ∈

I(m) s.t. g ∈ Sp.3. Refinement oracle. Given the current schema and failure analysis, decide whether to create, merge, or split modules, and set their parameters I(m), Π( m), τ (m) in the module refinement step. Traditionally, these oracles require expensive human annotation or purpose-built classifiers trained on labeled data. In Section 4, we describe an alternative: an agentic LLM workflow equipped with grounding tools (entity queries, property lookups, sample inspection) that implements all three oracles, reducing both human effort and hallucination risk. 

Convergence. The schema evolves through additive updates to gates and indicators, with periodic module restructuring during refinement. Under fixed category priority, gate expansion typically improves category coverage, so rc is non-decreasing in most rounds. By contrast, rm is not guaranteed to be monotonic: reassignment and module updates can temporarily increase or decrease |E¬m| before later rounds recover coverage. The loop terminates when both rates reach their targets or when no further oracle assignments are made. In practice, we set θc and θm to about 0.9, since a long tail of rare or ambiguous types may not belong in any category; the oracles correctly decline to assign them, and the remaining gap reflects genuine coverage limits of the schema rather than algorithmic failure. 5Algorithm 1 Iterative Schema Refinement 

Require: K = ( E, P, V ), seed schema S0, oracles δc : V → Ci, δm : V → m, thresholds θc, θ m

Ensure: Refined schema S∗ 

> 1:

S ← S 0 

> 2:

∀ e ∈ E: compute category (e); ∀ m ∈ M category (e): compute match (e, m ) ▷ initial classification  

> 3:

E∅ ← { e : category (e) = ∅} , E¬m ← { e : category (e) = Ci ∧ ∀ m ∈ M i, ¬match (e, m )} 

> 4:

rc ← 1 − | E∅|/|E| 

> 5:

Nc ← | E| − | E∅|; rm ←

0, Nc = 0 1 − | E¬m|/N c, Nc > 0 

> 6:

while rc < θ c or rm < θ m do  

> 7:

T ← CANDIDATE TYPES (E∅) ▷ gate expansion  

> 8:

for all t ∈ T do  

> 9:

Gδc(t) ← Gδc(t) ∪ { t} 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

for all categories Ci do ▷ gate–module sync  

> 12:

for all new g ∈ Gi s.t. ̸ ∃ m ∈ M i, (p, S p) ∈ I(m) : g ∈ Sp do  

> 13:

m ← δm(g); select (p, S p) ∈ I(m) with Sp̸ = ∅ (or create one); Sp ← Sp ∪ { g} 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Update or create m ∈ M i for each i: I(m), Π( m), τ (m) ▷ module refinement  

> 17:

∀ e ∈ E: compute category (e); ∀ m ∈ M category (e): compute match (e, m ) ▷ reclassify  

> 18:

E∅ ← { e : category (e) = ∅} , E¬m ← { e : category (e) = Ci ∧ ∀ m ∈ M i, ¬match (e, m )} 

> 19:

rc ← 1 − | E∅|/|E| 

> 20:

Nc ← | E| − | E∅|; rm ←

0, Nc = 0 1 − | E¬m|/N c, Nc > 0 

> 21:

end while  

> 22:

return S∗ ← S 

# 4 Wikidata Case Study 

We apply the methodology from Section 3 to Wikidata (January 2026 dump), which contains approximately 100 M entities. We resolve labels and descriptions using a fixed language fallback order: en → en-us → en-gb → mul . The pipeline proceeds through data cleaning, schema instantiation and refinement, and output generation, with an agentic LLM workflow implementing the decision oracles. 

4.1 Data Cleaning 

The input is a single Wikidata JSON dump (100 GB compressed), which we partition into 24 independent Zstandard-compressed JSON Lines files ( .jsonl.zst ), each containing approximately 4.5 M entities, enabling parallel processing across all downstream stages. The first step establishes graph scope : which entities belong in the graph at all. Wikidata’s 100 M entities include a substantial proportion of automated bulk imports and infrastructure entities that are not suitable for an encyclopedic knowledge graph. Data cleaning separates these from genuine editorial content through a priority-ordered cascade: 1. Structural classification. P31-based detection using 45 infrastructure QIDs (e.g., Wikimedia disambiguation pages, categories) and 28 bulk-import QIDs (e.g., scientific article, gene) identifies entities that are structurally outside the encyclopedic scope. 2. Source signature matching. 19 known import databases (e.g., CrossRef, astronomy catalogs, taxonomy databases) are detected via characteristic property combinations that fingerprint their bulk-imported entities. 3. Curation score. A weighted curation score protects notable entities from false positives—an entity with rich editorial signals is retained even if its P31 type matches a bulk-import pattern. 4. Ratio-based safety net. Remaining entity types with a bulk-import property ratio ≥ 70% and insufficient curation signals (score < 3) are automatically classified as non-core. 

> 36 properties across five tiers weighted 1–3: strong signals (images, coordinates, website) score 3; medium signals (awards, notable work) score 2; weak signals (country, industry) score 1; with separate people-specific tiers for occupation, education, etc.

6The cleaning stage is rule-based and deterministic given fixed rule definitions: every tier assignment traces to a specific match. Prior work on Wikidata quality focuses on statement-level accuracy and completeness [ 20 , 21 , 22 ]; our cleaning addresses a complementary dimension—entity-level provenance—and is designed to separate likely human-curated content from likely automated bulk imports [ 23 , 24 ]. After cleaning, 34.6 M entities remain as the core dataset for classification. 

4.2 Schema Instantiation and Refinement 

The seed schema S0 was constructed by incorporating three sources: Schema.org’s type hierarchy for broad category structure, YAGO 4.5’s curated taxonomy for entity type coverage, and Wikidata’s own EntitySchema definitions for property-level detail. From these, we derived eight categories: people , places , creative_works_media , knowledge ,

science , organizations , events_actions , and products_artifacts . Gate matching checks P31 (instance of) and P279 (subclass of) values against curated QID sets in a fixed priority order. The schema is defined in eight YAML files, each specifying gate QIDs, core properties, and module definitions with indicators and value properties. 

Refinement process. We applied Algorithm 1 iteratively over the core dataset. The Rust classifier processes the full 34.6 M entity set in approximately five minutes ( ∼110,000 entities/second), making A/B comparison practical for every schema edit. All runtime measurements in this section were recorded on a local MacBook Pro with Apple M4 Max (16 CPU cores, 48 GB RAM). Each round applied the three oracles (Section 4.3 details the implementation): δc expanded gate sets with unclassified P31 types, δm synchronized new gate values to module indicators, and the refinement oracle merged, split, or created modules as needed. 

Final schema. After convergence, the refined schema S∗ achieves a classification rate of 93.3% (32.3 M of 34.6 M core entities) and a module-assignment rate of 98.0% among classified entities (no-module rate reduced from 15.8% to 2.0%). The schema comprises 94 modules: 56 intrinsic and 38 relational. Intrinsic modules are category-confined (e.g., 

film in creative_works_media, river in places). Relational modules capture cross-cutting domains: 18 span three or more categories (e.g., military in 6, religion in 7) and 2 span exactly two ( affiliation and technology ), while 18 single-category modules are typed relational because their value properties create entity-to-entity edges (e.g., 

family in people, genomics in science). Figure 2 visualizes the complete module landscape. 

4.3 Agentic Oracle Implementation 

The three decision oracles ( δc, δm, and the refinement oracle) are implemented as an agentic workflow powered by Claude Opus 4.6. Two challenges motivate the tool design. First, LLMs hallucinate Wikidata identifiers: given a label, an LLM may fabricate a plausible but nonexistent QID, and given a QID, it may invent an incorrect label. Second, the agent cannot reliably classify an unfamiliar entity type from its label alone—it requires seeing sample entities, instance counts, and descriptions to make an informed category decision. To address both challenges, the agent is equipped with grounding tools that provide verified information from the knowledge graph: • LMDB label lookup (query_lmdb ): resolves QIDs and PIDs to their canonical English labels, and vice versa, against a memory-mapped store built once from a full scan of the Wikidata dump. Every identifier the agent references is verified through this tool. • Live P31 query (query_p31 ): queries the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint to retrieve entity counts, labels, descriptions, and sample instances for a given P31 type—allowing the agent to inspect what a type value actually represents before deciding its category or module assignment. • Tag validator (tag_validator ): validates YAML schema files for structural correctness, gate–module synchronization, QID/PID format, and cross-category gate exclusivity. • Category P31 analysis (analyze_category_p31 ): produces per-category coverage statistics, P31 frequency tables, P31 ×module cross-tabulations, and reports of entities with no module assignment—diagnosing exactly where the schema fails. • Unclassified hub analysis (find_unclassified_hubs ): identifies high-reference unclassified entities in the classified Parquet files using DuckDB, groups them by P31 type, and ranks by inbound reference count— surfacing the entity types with the greatest impact on graph connectivity. 

> Anthropic’s Claude Opus 4.6 (claude-opus-4-6), accessed via Claude Code CLI. We use LMDB (Lightning Memory-Mapped Database) for its zero-copy reads and constant-time key lookups, enabling instant label resolution without loading the full database into memory.

7C A T E G O R I E S R E L A T I O N A L M O D U L E S 

> People
> 10.5M
> Places
> 8.3M
> Creative Works
> 3.8M
> Knowledge
> 3.4M
> Science
> 2.8M
> Organizations
> 1.9M
> Events
> 920K
> Products
> 754K
> religion
> 7
> award
> 6
> education
> 6
> military
> 6
> culture
> 5
> entertainment
> 5
> sports
> 5
> finance
> 4
> food
> 4
> healthcare
> 4
> hierarchy
> 4
> society
> 4
> transportation
> 4
> authorship
> 3
> government
> 3
> legal
> 3
> location
> 3
> politics
> 3

Figure 2: Bipartite view of 8 categories (top) connected to 18 cross-category relational modules with span ≥ 3 (bottom). Badges indicate category span. Two additional modules ( affiliation and technology , each spanning 2 categories) are omitted for clarity. The full schema comprises 56 intrinsic modules, 18 single-category relational modules, and 20 cross-category relational modules. A key design choice in the YAML schema is that every QID and PID must carry an inline comment with its canonical English label, verified against LMDB by the tag validator. This makes the schema files self-documenting: the agent can review and edit definitions by reading the YAML directly, without querying each identifier individually. Live SPARQL queries are used only for exploratory inspection of candidate P31 types during refinement; final classification and evaluation metrics are computed from the fixed January 2026 dump. 

Investigation phase. The agent examines two priority lists: the top-k most frequent unclassified entity types (for coverage) and the top-k highest-reference hub types (for graph connectivity—these may be infrequent but heavily referenced by classified entities). The values of k and the number of refinement rounds are chosen adaptively from round to round based on observed failure patterns and review capacity, rather than fixed globally. For each candidate, the agent queries labels and sample entities via the grounding tools, then generates a report recommending which category ( δc), which module ( δm), and whether new modules are needed. This report is presented for human review; the reviewer may accept, reject, or annotate individual recommendations. 

Implementation phase. The agent applies the approved changes to the YAML files, using the label lookup to ensure correct QID/PID annotations and the tag validator to check structural integrity. The human operator then triggers reclassification via the Rust classifier to measure the coverage improvement, closing the loop for the next refinement round. 

4.4 Classified Result 

The primary output of the classification pipeline is a set of Parquet files (13 columns per entity) containing category, module assignments, and claims partitioned into four buckets: core (shared identity attributes), intrinsic (category-specific scalar properties), relational (entity-to-entity connections), and unclaimed (remaining properties). Each claim carries its property label, resolved value label, qualifiers, and a pre-generated natural-language sentence (e.g., “James Humphrey Walwyn’s occupation is military officer (military branch: Royal Navy).”) with all QIDs and PIDs replaced 8by their English labels. These self-contained files serve as the single source for all downstream outputs: the core and intrinsic buckets provide lookup-table information for each node, the relational bucket drives graph edge construction, and the sentence field enables direct use in LLM prompts or text-based retrieval without additional ID resolution. For property graph database import (Neo4j), a three-pass export pipeline produces graph-ready CSVs: 1. Node export. One CSV file per category (8 files), each containing entity QID, label, description, and core properties as node attributes. Intrinsic module properties are included as additional columns on the node. 2. Edge export. One CSV file per relational module (38 files), each containing source QID, target QID, relationship type (module name), and qualifier properties. Only value properties whose targets are themselves entities ( v ∈ E) produce edges. 3. Stub node export. Edge targets that are not in the core dataset—entities referenced by relational modules but excluded during data cleaning—are exported as stub nodes with QID and label only, preserving graph connectivity without inflating the classified node set. This maps directly to the intrinsic–relational distinction: intrinsic modules become node attributes (suitable for tabular stores or property lookups), while relational modules become typed edges (suitable for graph traversal). The separation ensures that each storage engine carries only the data matching its primary access pattern. The final graph contains 32.3 M classified entity nodes, 1.7 M stub nodes, and 61.2 M edges across 38 relationship types (34.0 M total nodes). The raw CSV export totals 9.1 GB (1.7 GB gzipped). The pipeline is implemented in both Rust and Python: the Rust exporter processes all 24 shards in approximately 11 minutes; the Python implementation provides a single-threaded reference for validation and ad-hoc analysis. 

# 5 Applications 

The preceding sections constructed the schema; this section demonstrates why the construction is ontology-oriented. Each application consumes the declarative schema or the classified output independently of the original Wikidata dump and the classification pipeline: (1) ontology structure analysis and domain-specific subgraph extraction, (2) benchmark annotation auditing via ontological classification, (3) entity disambiguation via module-based type profiles, (4) domain customization through module decomposition, and (5) LLM-guided entity extraction using the schema as prompt instructions. 

5.1 Ontology Structure 

The intrinsic-relational distinction produces a natural two-level ontology that can be analyzed structurally. Figure 2 presents the cross-category relational structure: 8 categories (top) connected to 18 relational modules spanning 3 or more categories (bottom). The badge on each module indicates its category span; the connections between categories and modules form the schema’s relational backbone. The bipartite structure reveals two patterns. First, relational modules vary widely in span: religion connects 7 categories, while authorship and politics each bridge 3. Second, the modules form natural domain clusters visible in Figure 2: governance-related modules ( government , legal , politics ) share the same category connections, as do cultural modules ( culture , entertainment , sports , religion ) and economic modules ( finance , food ,

transportation ). These clusters suggest that the relational modules capture coherent thematic domains rather than arbitrary property groupings. These domain clusters directly enable topic-centered subgraph extraction. Selecting a cluster of relational modules produces a self-contained graph with its own node types, edge types, and schema. Figure 3 demonstrates this with the governance cluster: selecting government , legal , and politics yields a geopolitical subgraph spanning People (Obama, Trump), Knowledge (positions like US Senator), Organizations (political parties), and Events (congressional sessions, impeachment proceedings). Similarly, healthcare + education + Science yields a biomedical research subgraph, and culture + entertainment + sports yields a cultural analysis subgraph—each derived entirely from module selection. Beyond schema-level analysis, the classification system also operates at the individual entity level, transforming an unstructured bag of Wikidata properties into an organized view. Table 1 illustrates this with a live Wikidata query for Apple Inc. (Q312), which currently carries 248 raw properties with no grouping beyond property IDs. The classifier routes it to organizations and assigns properties to structured groups: core properties (inception, headquarters, country) provide entity identity; the intrinsic module corporation captures corporate attributes such as employees 9K N O W L E D G E P E O P L E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S E V E N T S             

> Ppolitical party
> Ppolitical party
> Gposition held
> Gposition held
> Gmember of
> Gmember of
> Gposition held
> Ldefendant
> Barack Obama Donald Trump Democratic Party Republican Party UnitedNations
> President of the US US Senator 109th Congress 110th Congress 1st Impeachment of Trump G O V E R N A N C E M O D U L E S GGovernment
> LLegal
> PPolitics

Figure 3: Governance domain subgraph extracted by selecting three relational modules: government (green), legal 

(red), and politics (purple). The subgraph spans four categories—People, Knowledge, Organizations, and Events— with edge labels showing the underlying Wikidata properties (e.g., position held, political party, member of). Table 1: Property organization for Apple Inc. (Q312), showing selected properties from a live Wikidata query (248 total). Core and intrinsic properties map to tabular output; relational properties become typed graph edges. 

Type Module Property Sample Values 

core P571 inception 1976-04-01 P856 official website https://apple.com/ 

Intrinsic corporation P1128 employees 164,000; 154,000; 147,000; . . . P1056 products Apple Watch, iPad, iPhone, . . . 

Relational 

affiliation 

P112 founded by Steve Wozniak, Ronald Wayne, Steve Jobs P127 owned by Vanguard Group, Berkshire Hathaway, BlackRock P355 child organization Beats Electronics, Anobit, Braeburn Capital, . . . P361 part of Nasdaq-100, Dow Jones, Big Tech, . . . P463 member of Computer & Communications Industry Assoc., . . . 

finance P169 CEO Tim Cook, Steve Jobs, Gil Amelio, . . . P414 stock exchange Tokyo Stock Exchange, Nasdaq 

location 

P276 location United States P495 country of origin United States P740 location of formation Los Altos 

Unclaimed external IDs, social media links, minor metadata 

and products for tabular lookup; and relational modules route properties to typed graph edges— affiliation connects Apple to its founders, owners, and subsidiaries, finance links to stock exchanges and executives, and location 

anchors the entity geographically. The remaining properties are predominantly external identifiers (database cross-references, social media links) that fall outside the ontological schema. 10 Table 2: Three-way agreement on 5,429 shared entities (matched by Wikidata QID) between AIDA-YAGO and CleanCoNLL. The YAML classifier has no NER-specific tuning; a complete case-level breakdown of disagreement categories is provided in the project repository. Scenario Count Interpretation All three agree 4,840 Consensus AIDA wrong, Clean + Ours agree 180 AIDA error confirmed Clean wrong, AIDA + Ours agree 23 CleanCoNLL error confirmed All three disagree 4 Different error modes Both NER differ from ontology 84 Linking errors or boundary cases Unclassified (no gate match) 298 Cannot evaluate 

5.2 Benchmark Annotation Auditing 

Because the gate-based classifier uses only Wikidata ontological types (P31/P279) and is not trained on NER labels, it can serve as an external auditor of benchmark annotations. We evaluate it on two datasets derived from the same CoNLL-2003 Reuters corpus: AIDA-YAGO [ 25 ], whose mentions were manually linked to 2011 Wikipedia, and CleanCoNLL [ 26 ], a 2023 re-annotation of the corpus with revised labels and refreshed entity links. We resolve linked Wikipedia titles to Wikidata QIDs so that each entity can be passed through the ontological classifier. Across the full linked AIDA-YAGO and CleanCoNLL entity sets, the classifier assigns an ontological category to 95.1% and 93.9% of entities, respectively; among classified entities, these categories align with the benchmark NER labels for 93.2% and 97.9%, respectively. To enable a direct three-way comparison, we restrict attention to the 5,429 entities that appear in both datasets with the same Wikidata QID; Table 2 summarizes the results. More importantly, when AIDA-YAGO and CleanCoNLL disagree, the ontological classifier can act as a tiebreaker. As Table 2 shows, it sides with CleanCoNLL in 180 cases and with AIDA-YAGO in 23—a 7.8:1 ratio that supports most of CleanCoNLL’s corrections while exposing a smaller set of over-corrections. In 4 cases all three systems disagree. We now walk through the table rows to characterize each disagreement type. 

AIDA errors confirmed (180). The largest group consists of clear AIDA-YAGO errors that CleanCoNLL inde-pendently corrected. The dominant patterns are national sports teams tagged as LOC instead of ORG (e.g., “Brazil” referring to the national football team) and outdated entity links pointing to disambiguation pages rather than the intended entity. 

CleanCoNLL errors confirmed (23). Most are systematic LOC →ORG over-corrections: the majority involve physical locations such as airports, mines, museums, ports, and government buildings that CleanCoNLL re-tagged as organizations, while the Wikidata ontology and AIDA-YAGO both treat them as locations. 

Both NER differ from ontology (84). This group contains two distinct phenomena. First, 30 are entity-linking errors: 22 disambiguation page links shared across both datasets, plus 8 cases where the mention is linked to the wrong entity entirely. For example, the headline “CRAWLEY FORCED TO SIT AND WAIT” refers to cricketer John Crawley, and both datasets correctly tag it PER, but the entity link points to the town of Crawley (Q844908), which our system classifies as a place. In these cases the NER tags are correct for the intended referent; only the entity links are wrong. Second, the remaining 54 are genuine boundary cases where NER and ontological classification apply different criteria: central banks (ORG by function vs. institutional places by Wikidata typing), publications (ORG vs. creative works), and historical countries (LOC vs. abstract historical concepts). These are not errors in either system. The result is not simply that the ontology “beats” benchmark labels, but that it provides an independent, interpretable signal for separating annotation mistakes, linking mistakes, and task-definition differences. 

5.3 Entity Profile and Disambiguation 

The module system produces structured entity profiles that serve as discriminative type annotations for entity disam-biguation. We evaluate this on the BLINK benchmark using Voyage rerank-2.5, comparing our module-based type annotations against YAGO 4.5’s curated type hierarchy. To isolate the effect of type annotations from candidate retrieval, we compare on the 12,323 mentions where both systems return the same candidate entities—so observed accuracy 11 Table 3: Entity disambiguation accuracy on BLINK benchmark (12,323 controlled mentions with identical candidate lists). Module-based type annotations vs. YAGO 4.5 types, using Voyage rerank-2.5. Group Candidates Mentions YAGO Module-Based (Our Approach) 1 < 5 10,284 91.2% 91.6% 2 5–9 1,666 84.4% 85.4% 3 10–19 348 82.5% 82.8% 4 ≥ 20 25 68.0% 76.0% 

Macro Avg – 81.5% 83.9% 

differences are primarily attributable to type annotations under this controlled candidate set, rather than candidate coverage. The module-based approach achieves a 2.4 percentage point improvement in macro average accuracy (83.9% vs. 81.5%). Gains are largest in the hardest group (20+ candidates, +8.0 points), where richer type annotations provide the most disambiguation signal; because this bucket contains only 25 mentions, the effect size should be interpreted as directional. The improvement is driven by higher annotation density: module-based candidates carry an average of 2.52 type labels per entity compared to YAGO’s 1.42. Three mechanisms contribute: (1) relational modules extract fine-grained attributes (e.g., the sports module routes to playing position via P413, distinguishing “running back” from “defensive end” where YAGO assigns identical “American Football Player” types); (2) the module system recovers specific occupations for entities YAGO labels only as generic “Person” (30.8% of YAGO’s exclusive failures); and (3) intrinsic modules provide domain signals (e.g., art , comics ) that further distinguish entities sharing identical instance-of types. 

5.4 Schema Customization 

The declarative YAML schema is designed as a parameterized schema generator: the generic definitions (8 categories, 94 modules) serve as a template that domain experts can customize without code changes. Customization follows three operations: selecting which categories and modules to include, decomposing broad modules into fine-grained facets, and adding domain-specific gate QIDs or indicators. The entire pipeline (classification, export, graph construction) adapts to whatever YAML definitions are provided. We demonstrate this with the education module in people, which contains approximately 90 P106 occupation indicators spanning natural sciences, engineering, humanities, social sciences, and teaching. In the generic schema, a marine biologist and a medieval historian both receive the same education tag with no further distinction. By decomposing this single module into 9 domain facets—e.g., natural_science , humanities , engineering —users obtain fine-grained classification while preserving the same YAML structure (Appendix A lists all 9 facets and a sample YAML definition). Only the indicator values change; the pipeline works unchanged. This enables targeted graph construction: a biomedical researcher selects natural_science + teaching to produce a focused graph of life scientists and medical educators, while a digital humanities project selects humanities +

literary + information to distinguish historians, linguists, literary scholars, and librarians—all of whom are conflated under the generic education module. 

5.5 LLM-Guided Entity Extraction 

The YAML schema serves as a lightweight ontological structure for LLM-based entity extraction. The 8 categories define an entity taxonomy, while module names act as fine-grained semantic tags. An LLM can use this structure to extract entities from unstructured text and classify them with contextually relevant facets—without fine-tuning. A prompt template is constructed directly from the schema: categories provide the entity type taxonomy (e.g., Person, Organization, Place, Science), and each category’s module names provide the tag vocabulary (e.g., for Person: entertain-ment, education, politics, sports, military, finance). For readability, these display labels map directly to canonical schema categories ( people , organizations , places , science , knowledge , events_actions , products_artifacts ,

creative_works_media ). The LLM receives a text passage and returns structured output—entity name, category, and context-relevant tags (Appendix B provides the full prompt template). Table 4 illustrates the output on a passage about the Mercury automobile brand. This approach has two advantages over ad-hoc extraction schemas. First, the tag vocabulary is grounded in a schema that has been iteratively refined against 32.3 M classified entities, supporting broad coverage with reduced redundancy 12 Table 4: LLM-guided entity extraction from a Wikipedia passage about Mercury (automobile), using the YAML schema as prompt instructions. Model: GPT-5-mini. Entity Category Tags Mercury Product brand, vehicle, transportation Ford Motor Company Organization corporation, transportation Edsel Ford Person creativity Lincoln-Mercury Division Organization affiliation, corporation in practice. Second, extracted entities can be directly linked to the knowledge graph via category and module alignment, enabling seamless integration of LLM-extracted information with the existing graph structure. Taken together, these five applications demonstrate that the declarative schema is a reusable artifact in its own right— supporting ontology analysis, benchmark auditing, entity disambiguation, domain customization, and information extraction independently of the graph construction pipeline that produced it. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We presented an ontology-oriented approach to knowledge graph construction grounded in a single design principle: routing each property as either intrinsic—stored as a node attribute for lookup—or relational—exported as a traversable edge. Formalizing this distinction into a declarative schema brings two benefits. First, it makes structural decisions explicit and inspectable, replacing ad-hoc property handling embedded in construction code. Second, it decouples the schema from the pipeline that produced it, enabling independent reuse for downstream tasks such as those demonstrated in the applications section. Several directions remain open. The current schema was refined against the January 2026 Wikidata dump, but graph expansion from external sources such as LLM-extracted knowledge graphs will introduce relation types that do not align cleanly with the existing module inventory. Accommodating such expansion requires schema-extension methods that can map new relations to existing modules when possible, extend modules when needed, and introduce new modules when no faithful alignment exists. A systematic study of schema-guided retrieval—using the intrinsic-relational structure to shape context selection for retrieval-augmented generation—is a natural next step toward closing the loop between graph construction and downstream LLM performance. 

# References 

[1] Denny Vrandecic and Markus Krötzsch. Wikidata: A free collaborative knowledgebase. Communications of the ACM , 57(10):78–85, 2014. [2] Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimitris Kontokostas, Pablo N. Mendes, Sebastian Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick van Kleef, Sören Auer, and Christian Bizer. DBpedia – a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted from Wikipedia. Semantic Web , 6(2):167–195, 2015. [3] Fabian Suchanek, Mehwish Alam, Andrea Boschin, Lydia Laich, and Thomas Pellissier Tanon. YAGO 4.5: A large and clean knowledge base with a rich taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2024) , pages 2560–2569, 2024. [4] Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum. YAGO: A core of semantic knowledge unifying WordNet and Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’07) ,pages 697–706, 2007. [5] Johanna Geiss, Andreas Spitz, and Michael Gertz. NECKAr: A named entity classifier for Wikidata. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2018 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018. [6] Shixiong Zhao and Hideaki Takeda. Diagnosing and mitigating semantic inconsistencies in Wikidata’s classifica-tion hierarchy. arXiv preprint , 2025. arXiv:2511.04926. [7] Giancarlo Guizzardi. Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models . PhD thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2005. CTIT PhD Thesis Series No. 05-74. [8] Giancarlo Guizzardi, Alessander Botti Benevides, Claudenir M. Fonseca, Daniele Porello, João Paulo A. Almeida, and Tiago Prince Sales. UFO: Unified foundational ontology. Applied Ontology , 17(1):167–210, 2022. 13 [9] Gregor Kiczales, John Lamping, Anurag Mendhekar, Chris Maeda, Cristina Lopes, Jean-Marc Loingtier, and John Irwin. Aspect-oriented programming. In ECOOP’97 — Object-Oriented Programming , volume 1241 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 220–242. Springer, 1997. [10] Shiyali Ramamrita Ranganathan. Colon Classification . Madras Library Association, Madras, 1933. 1st edition; 7th edition 1987. [11] Heiner Stuckenschmidt, Christine Parent, and Stefano Spaccapietra, editors. Modular Ontologies: Concepts, Theories and Techniques for Knowledge Modularization , volume 5445 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science .Springer, 2009. [12] Bowen Zhang and Harold Soh. Extract, define, canonicalize: An LLM-based framework for knowledge graph construction. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9502–9528, 2024. [13] Xiaohan Feng, Xixin Wu, and Helen Meng. Ontology-grounded automatic knowledge graph construction by LLM under Wikidata schema. arXiv preprint , 2024. arXiv:2412.20942. [14] Fredo Erxleben, Michael Günther, Markus Krötzsch, Julian Mendez, and Denny Vrandeˇ ci´ c. Introducing Wikidata to the linked data web. In The Semantic Web (ISWC 2014) , volume 8796 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 50–65. Springer, 2014. [15] Javier D. Fernández, Miguel A. Martínez-Prieto, Claudio Gutiérrez, Axel Polleres, and Mario Arias. Binary RDF representation for publication and exchange (HDT). Journal of Web Semantics , 19:22–41, 2013. [16] Phuc Nguyen and Hideaki Takeda. Wikidata-lite for knowledge extraction and exploration. arXiv preprint , 2022. arXiv:2211.05416. [17] Renzo Angles. The property graph database model. In Proceedings of the 12th Alberto Mendelzon International Workshop on Foundations of Data Management (AMW 2018) , volume 2100 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings ,Cali, Colombia, 2018. [18] Renzo Angles, Harsh Thakkar, and Dominik Tomaszuk. Mapping RDF databases to property graph databases. 

IEEE Access , 8:86091–86110, 2020. [19] Aidan Hogan, Eva Blomqvist, Michael Cochez, Claudia d’Amato, Gerard de Melo, Claudio Gutierrez, Sabrina Kir-rane, José Emilio Labra Gayo, Roberto Navigli, Sebastian Neumaier, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Axel Polleres, Sabbir M. Rashid, Anisa Rula, Lukas Schmelzeisen, Juan Sequeda, Steffen Staab, and Antoine Zimmermann. Knowledge graphs. ACM Computing Surveys , 54(4):1–37, 2021. [20] Alessandro Piscopo and Elena Simperl. What we talk about when we talk about Wikidata quality: A literature survey. In Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Open Collaboration (OpenSym ’19) , Skövde, Sweden, 2019. [21] Kartik Shenoy, Filip Ilievski, Daniel Garijo, Daniel Schwabe, and Pedro Szekely. A study of the quality of Wikidata. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web , 72:100679, 2021. [22] Heiko Paulheim. Knowledge graph refinement: A survey of approaches and evaluation methods. Semantic Web ,8(3):489–508, 2017. [23] Thomas Steiner. Bots vs. Wikipedians, anons vs. logged-ins (redux): A global study of edit activity on Wikipedia and Wikidata. In Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Open Collaboration (OpenSym ’14) , 2014. [24] Thomas Pellissier Tanon, Denny Vrandeˇ ci´ c, Sebastian Schaffert, Thomas Steiner, and Lydia Pintscher. From Freebase to Wikidata: The great migration. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’16) , pages 1419–1428, 2016. [25] Johannes Hoffart, Mohamed Amir Yosef, Ilaria Bordino, Hagen Fürstenau, Manfred Pinkal, Marc Spaniol, Bilyana Taneva, Stefan Thater, and Gerhard Weikum. Robust disambiguation of named entities in text. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 782–792, 2011. [26] Susanna Rücker and Alan Akbik. CleanCoNLL: A nearly noise-free named entity recognition dataset. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8628–8645, 2023. 14 A Schema Customization: Education Module Decomposition 

Table 5 summarizes the decomposition of the generic education module (people category) into 9 domain-specific facets totaling 87 occupations. Table 5: Decomposition of the education module into 9 domain facets. Facet Domain Occupations natural_science Life sciences, taxonomy, ecology 22 humanities History, philosophy, languages, archaeology 16 teaching Pedagogy at all levels 13 engineering Applied sciences, computing 11 physical_science Physics, chemistry, earth sciences, math 9social_science Economics, sociology, psychology 6general_academic Cross-domain academic roles 5literary Literary criticism and scholarship 3information Library and archival sciences 2

Total 87 

Listing 1 shows a sample YAML definition for the natural_science facet. Listing 1: YAML definition for the natural_science facet (biomedical domain subset).                       

> modules: natural_science: type: relational indicators: P101: # field of work P69: # educated at P106: # occupation - Q864503 # biologist - Q2374149 # botanist - Q3779582 # microbiologist - Q3640160 # marine biologist - Q350979 # zoologist - Q3055126 # entomologist - Q1225716 # ornithologist - Q2487799 # mycologist - Q15839134 # ecologist - Q18805 # naturalist - Q12773412 # parasitologist - Q4205432 # ichthyologist # ... 10 more occupations value_props: - P101 # field of work - P69 # educated at - P512 # academic degree - P184 # doctoral advisor - P185 # doctoral student - P1416 # affiliation - P803 # professorship

# B LLM-Guided Extraction Prompt 

The following system prompt is constructed directly from the schema’s category taxonomy and module tag vocabulary. It is provided to the LLM alongside a text passage; the model returns structured JSON with extracted entities, their category, context-relevant tags, and an explanatory context field. The prompt maps directly to the schema: the eight categories correspond to the eight classification categories, and the per-category tag lists are the relational module names from the YAML definitions. No Wikidata-specific training is required—any LLM with instruction-following capability can use this prompt to produce schema-aligned extractions. 15 Listing 2: System prompt for schema-guided entity extraction. 

You are an entity extraction system. Given a text passage, extract all named entities and classify each one into a category, then assign relevant tags. ### Entity Categories Use the following taxonomy to classify each extracted entity: | Category | Entity Types (examples) ||--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------| | Person | human (real, living or historical) || Organization | business, company, university, government agency || Work | book, film, television series, fictional character || Place | street, river, human settlement, lake || Science | planet, asteroid, chemical element, disease, gene || Event | war, battle, election, conference, natural disaster || Knowledge | scholarly article, theorem, algorithm, law || Product | software, aircraft, vehicle, video game |### Tags For each category, assign tags from the list below if relevant to that entity under the original context -- not based on general world knowledge. - Person: entertainment, creativity, education, politics, sports, religion, finance, military, society, crime, family, award, healthcare, legal, culture, government, technology, food - Organization: location, affiliation, education, international, government, corporation, culture, religion, politics, sports, broadcast, finance, society, healthcare, military, legal, transportation, entertainment, award, food - Work: literature, film, television, art, comics, periodical, revenue, museum, music, sports, military, religion, character, culture, award, authorship, location - Place: dwelling, commercial, culture, religion, infrastructure, transportation, government, administration, sports, heritage, education, nature, finance, military, entertainment, healthcare, affiliation, architecture, food - Science: element, compound, mineral, geology, disease, gene, biofunction, protein, pharmaceutical, anatomy, organism, botany, astronomy, clinical, healthcare, education, biosystem, clinical_trial, cell_lineage, genomics - Event: military, conference, exhibition, disaster, violence, politics, award, sports, society , legal, entertainment, education, religion, transportation - Knowledge: language, theorem, algorithm, specification, abstract, position, law, unit, field, phenomenon, publication, reference, name, religion, jurisdiction - Product: cloud, aircraft, vehicle, computer, software, game, device, military, food, tool, currency, fiction, material, artifact, brand, entertainment, transportation, technology, award ### Output Format Return a JSON object: {"entities": [ {"entity": "Albert Einstein", "category": "Person", "tags": ["education", "award"], "context": "mentioned as Nobel Prize-winning physicist at Princeton" }]}### Instructions 1. Extract all named entities from the text 2. Classify each into exactly one category 3. Assign tags only when relevant in the given context 4. Include the context field to explain tag assignments 

16