Title: Computational Analysis of Semantic Connections Between Herman Melville Reading and Writing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14674v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 04:54:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Computational Analysis of Semantic Connections Between Herman Melville’s Reading and Writing 

Nudrat Habib, Elisa Barney Smith 

Luleå University of Technology 

nudrat.habib@ltu.se elisa.barney@ltu.se 

Steven Olsen-Smith 

Boise State University 

sosmith@boisestate.edu 

Abstract 

This study investigates the potential influence of Herman Melville’s reading on his own writ-ings through computational semantic similarity analysis. Using documented records of books known to have been owned or read by Melville, we compare selected passages from his works with texts from his library. The methodology in-volves segmenting texts at both sentence level and non-overlapping 5-gram level, followed by similarity computation using BERTScore. Rather than applying fixed thresholds to deter-mine reuse, we interpret precision, recall, and F1 scores as indicators of possible semantic alignment that may suggest literary influence. Experimental results demonstrate that the ap-proach successfully captures expert-identified instances of similarity and highlights additional passages warranting further qualitative exami-nation. The findings suggest that semantic sim-ilarity methods provide a useful computational framework for supporting source and influence studies in literary scholarship. 

1 Introduction 

Similarities between literary texts can arise for many different reasons. In some cases they may reflect the influence of earlier authors on later ones, while in others they result from shared ideas, stylis-tic conventions, or overlapping cultural contexts. Identifying such relationships is a necessary un-dertaking in literary and computational studies be-cause it helps reveal how authors engage, con-sciously or unconsciously, with existing works. When dealing with historical documents, however, the sheer quantity of potentially relevant textual data presents serious obstacles to our comprehen-sion of what materials an author might have encoun-tered during their lifetime. Computational methods make it possible to trace potential textual relation-ships across large digital corpora. Of the three most frequently downloaded authors on Project Gutenberg, this study focuses on Her-man Melville, a prominent 19 th century American author whose materials are widely accessible in digital form. Our investigation examines both the books Melville authored and those he is known to have read. Melville typically autographed his books when he acquired them, often inscribing the date of acquisition along with the city or im-mediate setting where he recorded the autograph inscription (Olsen-Smith, 2022). From the books of his collection that survive today, Melville’s in-scribed date of acquisition supplies a chronolog-ical baseline for dating his reading of books that may have influenced works he went on to write. Even in cases of books from his library that are not known to survive, Melville’s practice of refer-ring to book purchases in dated letters and journals can furnish similar evidence of acquisition (Olsen-Smith, 2022). When no external or holograph evi-dence exists to document Melville’s ownership or consultation of a potentially influential book, schol-ars are tasked to demonstrate its influence through methods of text comparison to infer possible re-lationships between his reading and his writing (Bercaw, 1987). Melville’s characteristic methods of source appropriation are especially well suited for the study of literary influence in terms both of detectability and of investigative outcome. As Har-rison Hayford remarked in his study of Melville’s second book Omoo, the passages he derived from sources were “always rewritten and nearly always improved” by the process of appropriation (Hay-ford and Blair, 1969). Yet his methods of borrow-ing and altering from other books frequently left intact phrasal constructions and wording that make it possible to trace derived passages back to their original sources. This is of particular value in cases where no manuscripts of Melville’s works or source books marked and drawn upon by him are known to survive. The combination in Melville’s writings of vestigial source text and his creative reworking of that material illuminate his processes of literary 

> arXiv:2603.14674v1 [cs.CL] 15 Mar 2026

composition as well as his ideological departures from his printed sources, exposing depths of au-thorial intention and varieties of artistic craft that can only be spotted through these investigations (Norberg and Olsen-Smith, 2023). Traditional methods of identifying source influ-ence involved a scholar’s close reading and compar-ison of a created work and source books suspected to have played a role in its composition. While the scholar cannot be replaced, this process can be fa-cilitated by modern tools. We aim to utilize compu-tational tools to identify and analyze sources of tex-tual influence in Melville’s works and present them to scholars for further analysis. Computational tools for evaluating textual similarity exist and are used for tasks like author attribution and plagiarism detection. We focus on semantic similarity analysis as a means of identifying potential traces of liter-ary influence between Melville’s works and books he owned or consulted in the process of composi-tion. By framing the task in terms of automatic text comparison with reference sources, we draw on es-tablished computational techniques while shifting the emphasis from plagiarism detection, something needed in a modern context, to the scholarly ques-tion of how an author’s use of source texts can be systematically discovered and evaluated. By considering different forms of textual similarity ranging from word-for-word overlap to paraphras-tic resemblances we argue that semantic similarity measures provide a flexible and powerful approach, particularly when the exact nature of influence is unknown in advance. The research question we address is. 

Can semantic similarity analysis identify traces of literary influence in Herman Melville’s writings when compared to books he owned or may other-wise have consulted in the course of composition? 

Our contributions are as follows • We position semantic similarity analysis, and in particular BERTScore, as a tool for inves-tigating the possible influence on an author’s writing by works he read. • We present a feasibility study comparing se-lected passages from Melville’s works with texts from his documented readings, testing whether semantic similarity measures can highlight instances of overlap. • Our findings provide insight into the strengths and limitations of using BERTScore in this context, laying the groundwork for scaling up to full corpus analyses and comparing our approach with alternative similarity metrics. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on textual simi-larity, intertextual analysis, and computational ap-proaches to literary influence. Section 3 describes the methodology, including data selection, segmen-tation strategies, and the use of BERTScore for semantic similarity analysis. Section 4, titled Se-mantic Similarity Results: Evidence of Possible Influence, presents the experimental results and dis-cussion. Section 5 outlines the limitations of the current study and outlines the directions for future research, and Section 6 concludes this research. 

2 Related Work 

Text similarity measures how closely two pieces of text match each other. In its extreme it can iden-tify cases of plagiarism and many tools have been developed for this task. A high degree of textual similarity does not mean plagiarism. It can reflect overlapping language or common expressions that require careful human interpretation to assess intent and originality (Meo and Talha, 2019). N-gram analysis has been a fundamental tool in text comparison. A study related to the perfor-mance evaluation on number of tokens used in an n-gram was done by (Clough and Stevenson, 2011). (Clough and Stevenson, 2011) acknowledged that as the number n in an n-gram increases, the proba-bility of finding commonalities in the documents decreases. They observed the worst results for n-grams above 5. They also recommended that the reference document be split into similar n-grams in the suspicious document. In n-gram compari-son, possible plagiarism is recorded when a given threshold is surpassed (Clough and Stevenson, 2011). (Shrestha and Solorio, 2013) further com-pared variants that removed or retained stop words and explored the use of named-entity n-grams, while (Altheneyan and Menai, 2020) highlighted the effect of punctuation and sentence-boundary errors on classification accuracy. These studies emphasize how segmentation and pre-processing choices influence detection outcomes. Beyond surface matching, researchers have ex-plored statistical and machine-learning approaches to text comparison. (Šari´ c et al., 2012) employed correlation-based metrics such as overall Pearson and weighted mean for sentence-level similarity scoring. (Clough and Stevenson, 2011) applied Naive Bayes classification and evaluated perfor-mance using the F1 score, whereas (Altheneyan and Menai, 2020) implemented Support Vector Ma-chines (SVMs) with lexical, syntactic, and seman-tic features. The Meteor metric, originating in ma-chine translation, has also been adapted to detect paraphrastic or semantically equivalent passages (Altheneyan and Menai, 2020). Although these studies were primarily designed for plagiarism de-tection, the underlying computational methods are equally valuable for investigating literary source use. Source and influence studies have a long tradi-tion in pre-computational literary scholarship, start-ing in earnest roughly a century ago with John Livingston Lowe’s The Road to Xanadu, a study of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s use of sources in his poetry (Lowes, 1927). Traditional methods of comparison continue to be carried out—often with significant results. Yet no work to date has sys-tematically applied machine reading or automated analysis to examine how authors draw upon their sources in composing their own works. Broad digi-tal applications to reading practices—most notably the Archaeology of Reading (which transcribes and exposes marginalia in machine-readable form) and Annotated Books Online (Dijstelberge and Grafton, n.d.; Havens et al., n.d.), have made au-thorial reading methods and explicit annotations accessible for querying and close analysis. Simulta-neously, single-author initiatives such as The Walt Whitman Archive, The William Blake Archive and Melville’s Marginalia Online have built extensive image and transcription corpora that encode the particular books an author actually handled and marked, steadily building the provenance and read-ing evidence necessary for undertakings like the present study (Cohen et al.; Essick and Viscomi; Olsen-Smith et al., 2006). As these large-scale efforts finally achieve critical masses of machine-readable data, our research is now in a position to demonstrate the potential of computational ap-proaches, providing new insights about source-use that are both textually grounded and empirically testable. These methods allow researchers not only to assess and verify instances where Melville and other major authors demonstrably engaged with known sources but also to identify previously un-recognized influences that may have shaped his writing. The BERTScore was introduced by (Zhang et al., 2019) as an automatic evaluation metric for text generation. It measures semantic similarity be-tween two texts by comparing their contextual-ized token embeddings produced by pretrained transformer models. BERTScore can capture para-phrastic and meaning-level correspondence that extends beyond surface lexical overlap. In their original work, (Zhang et al., 2019) demonstrated that BERTScore correlates more strongly with hu-man judgments than existing metrics (BLEU and METEOR) and provides improved model selection performance for tasks such as machine translation and image captioning. Building on this founda-tion, (Tanahashi et al., 2020) applied BERTScore to the evaluation of translations of Japanese novels, further highlighting its usefulness for assessing se-mantic fidelity in literary contexts. More recently, (Jaskowski et al., 2024) noted that current imple-mentations of BERTScore do not expose all of the information the metric can produce, and introduced BERTScoreVisualizer, a tool that provides detailed token-level visualizations beyond the standard pre-cision, recall, and F1 outputs. Together, these stud-ies underscore the importance of BERTScore for semantic similarity analysis and highlight its effec-tiveness across a range of text comparison tasks. While most prior work has applied BERTScore in machine translation and related generation settings, its ability to quantify semantic similarity makes it a strong candidate for investigating possible literary influence between an author’s reading and writing. While prior work has demonstrated the effec-tiveness of embedding-based metrics for measur-ing semantic similarity, their application to literary source and influence studies remains limited. This study builds on these advances by applying seman-tic similarity analysis to examine potential textual relationships between an author’s reading and writ-ing. 

3 Methodology 

The broader goal of this research is to investigate semantic similarity across all works authored by Herman Melville and to compare them with the hundreds of books he is known to have read or owned in his personal library, as documented in (Bercaw, 1987; Sealts, 1988). Conducting a large-scale similarity analysis across Melville’s complete corpus and all of his known library holdings presents significant com-putational and methodological challenges. Each of these works span hundreds of pages, and the number of possible pairwise comparisons is pro-hibitively large. As a preliminary step, this study focuses on evaluating whether the proposed similarity anal-ysis method can effectively detect meaningful tex-tual overlaps. Specifically, we aim to determine whether the approach can identify known instances of semantic correspondence between Melville’s writings and the texts he read. To achieve this, we first compiled a set of exam-ple text pair instances in which potential similar-ities were believed to exist based on scholarship by experts analyzing source appropriation (Math-iessen, 1941; Olsen-Smith, 2011; Bezanson, 1982). From these we selected four text instances. The books and the corresponding text segments used in our experiments are detailed in Table 1. These identified correspondences served as our ground truth for evaluation. To ensure robustness, we did not restrict our anal-ysis to only the passages whose correspondence has previously been reported. Instead, we extended the context by including text segments occurring both before and after each candidate and target passage. This approach allowed for a more realistic test of the similarity model’s capacity to recognize rele-vant relationships in a broader and less constrained textual environment. The structure of the books varies widely, with some short chapters and some long and some have no formal divisions at all. We thus did not extract uniform text lengths or sec-tions across all text pair instances. Instead, we ensured that each extracted passage included suffi-cient context to allow for a meaningful similarity comparison, whether or not actual similarity was present. The texts for both Melville’s writings and his library holdings were obtained from Project Guten-berg 1 and the Internet Archive 2. After identify-ing candidate segments, we then divided them into smaller units suitable for computational compar-ison. Two different chunking strategies were ap-plied: • N-gram based segmentation: We use the same n-gram size for both texts; the segments from Melville’s writings and the correspond-ing segments from the books he read, follow-

> 1gutenberg.org
> 2archive.org

ing the approach of (Shrestha and Solorio, 2013). This method captures fine-grained lex-ical overlap and allows us to detect shorter recurring phrases or patterns that confirm bor-rowing from sources identified in the schol-arship. We choose the n-gram of 5 (5-gram), similar to the uses in (Suchomel et al., 2012). We use non-overlapping n-grams. This has the advantage of less computation effort with a trade-off on accuracy as compared to over-lapping window (Shrestha and Solorio, 2013). We do not focus on named entity n-grams because they may not be common in the docu-ments, thereby contributing less to detections (Shrestha and Solorio, 2013). • Sentence level segmentation: The selected segments were also divided at the sentence boundary. This provides larger semantic units that preserve syntactic and contextual informa-tion but will result in uneven chunk lengths. Using both chunking methods allowed us to ex-amine similarity at different granularities, short phrase-level and longer, sentence-level. For similarity analysis we used the BERTScore, a metric that evaluates the semantic similarity between two pieces of text using contextualized embeddings from pretrained transformer models (Zhang et al., 2019). Unlike traditional lexical over-lap metrics such as BLEU or ROUGE, BERTScore captures the meaning of words in context, mak-ing it particularly suitable for identifying subtle or paraphrased similarities across texts (Rostam et al., 2025). This is especially important for our study, as Melville’s rewriting of source passages often pro-duces alterations in vocabulary and phrasing, even when conveying similar ideas. BERTScore allows us to go beyond surface-level matching and evalu-ate whether two passages express similar meanings, regardless of exact duplication. Given that the in-fluence of a text may appear through paraphrase, thematic similarity, or conceptual overlap rather than direct quotation, BERTScore is a well-suited choice for our task. BERTScore produces precision, p, recall, r, and F1 scores (harmonic mean of p and r) that quantify the degree of semantic similarity between two texts. In prior work, particularly in evaluation of machine translation, higher scores are typically associated with closer semantic correspondence between a candidate text and a reference text. However, the Table 1: Reference books and their corresponding mentions in Melville’s works with target pages/chapters used in the comparison study.                          

> S.No Reference Book Author Pages / Chapters Melville’s Book Pages / Chapters
> 1A Visit to the South Seas: In the U. States Ship Vincennes, During the Years 1829 and 1830, Volume 1
> C.S. Stewart Letter XXXIII (pp. 306–318)
> Typee; or, Narrative of aFour Months’ Residence
> Chapter XXV 2Life and Remarkable Adventures of Israel R. Potter
> Henry Trumbull pp. 30–45 Israel Potter; His Fifty Years of Exile Chapter 4 3Religio Medici Sir Thomas Browne 3 chapters Mardi; and a Voyage Thither 3 chapters 4The Natural History of Sperm Whale Thomas Beale Introductory remarks
> Moby Dick Chapter 32

Algorithm 1: Algorithm for Similarity Analysis between what Melville read and what he wrote 

Input: Folders: 

M = {M1..M n} (Melville) 

R = {R1..R n} (Read) 

S = {5G , sent } Modes: 5G = non-overlapping 5-grams; sent = sentences 

Output: Scored CSVs for each mode 

Text segmentation (SEG) Function SEG( file, mode ):return segments by mode 

foreach mode ∈ S do for i ← 1 to n do 

X ← SEG (Mi, mode) 

Y ← SEG (Ri, mode) 

N ← max( |X|, |Y |)

create CSV with header [ID, text, read_text] 

for k ← 1 to N do 

write row [ k, Xk or "", Yk or ""] 

end 

save CSV as merged_i_mode 

end Computing Precision(p), Recall(r) and F Score(f) using BERTSCORE foreach CSV ∈

{merged_1_mode..merged_n_mode} do 

T ← CSV[text]; U ← CSV[read_text] 

for i ← 1 to |T | do for j ← 1 to |U | do 

(p, r, f ) ← BERTSCORE (Ti, Uj )store (p, r, f ) for iteration i

end 

append mean (p, r, f ) as columns pi, r i, f i

in CSV 

end 

save CSV as scored_i_mode 

end end 

literature does not establish any universal threshold that would indicate copying, reuse, or plagiarism, nor do such thresholds always apply straightfor-wardly to studies of literary influence. In the con-text of this research, we therefore do not interpret BERTScore values as binary indicators of reuse. Instead, we treat relatively higher scores as signals of potential semantic alignment, which may sug-gest areas where thematic, phrasal, or conceptual influence could be present. Our aim is to identify passages where the model detects meaningful sim-ilarity that merits qualitative attention by literary scholars for possible literary influence. We used the Microsoft/deberta-xlarge-mnli model variant of BERTScore, which has shown strong performance in natural language understanding tasks (Dernbach et al., 2024). The algorithm of our methodology for text comparison is shown in Algorithm 1. 

4 Semantic Similarity Results: Evidence of Possible Influence 

Our experimental results demonstrate that the model reliably captured the similarities in corre-spondences identified in the scholarship and also surfaced additional segments with high semantic similarity that had not been previously marked. In the subsections that follow, we examine these re-sults across the different experimental settings and discuss expert identified instances at both n-gram and sentence level granularities, then model iden-tified instances at both granularities. Finally we compare difference in results at both granularities. 

4.1 Expert Identified Instances: Validation of Semantic Similarity 

To illustrate how the model performs on an expert identified instance of potential influence, we con-sider the first instance in Table 1, where Melville’s book Typee is compared with Stewart’s book Avisit to the south seas . For illustrative purposes, Figure 1: 5-gram analysis: F1 scores for instance 1 in Table 1 comparing Typee with A visit to the south seas .   

> Figure 2: Sentence level analysis: F1 scores for instance 1 in Table 1 comparing Typee with A visit to the south seas .

throughout this paper only a selected portion of the experimental output from the text subsection is presented. The remaining results, comprising a broader set of sentence, and 5-gram-level compar-isons, are omitted to maintain clarity and focus on representative cases and are available upon request. Figures 1 and 2 display the corresponding results at two granularities: 5-gram sequences, Figure 1, and sentence-level segments, Figure 2. In both fig-ures, the colored text (green) highlights the portions previously marked by experts as potentially similar. Moreover, in the heatmap red cells represent pairs with stronger similarity, while yellow and green cells indicate weaker similarity. The computed F1-scores at their peak exceed 0.6 for both the 5-gram and sentence-level analyses, indicating a measur-able degree of similarity consistent with possible influence. In Figure 1, one specific 5-gram segment pair ("of a plurality of husbands" versus "a plurality of husbands, instead") produces a notably high F1-score (0.77), reflecting a strong degree of local similarity between the two texts. This elevated score likely results from overlapping lexical tokens shared between the work Melville read in the book by Stewart and the one he later authored. In Fig-ure 2, the sentences from these same text portions also display comparatively higher similarity values (0.63), although it was slightly lower than in the n-gram analysis. This difference arises because sentence-level comparisons encompass more to-kens, and the similarity tends to be concentrated within particular portions of the sentence rather than uniformly distributed across the entire seg-ment. The example in Figure 2 illustrates similarity at the sentence level, where the sentence in Melville’s writing appears to be influenced by a single sen-tence from the source text. The Table 1 instance 1 and instance 2 text pairs are both examples of the sentence to sentence similarity scenario. How-ever, other scenarios occur in which one written sentence is influenced by several sentences in the source. In Table 1 instances 3 and 4 represent such a scenario. Figure 3, shows the result from instance 4 of Table 1 where text from Moby Dick is com-pared with text from The Natural History of Sperm Whale . For this example, the values for all metrics (precision, recall, and F1 score) are presented in Figure 3. The orientation of read vs written text is swapped for better display. It is important to note that sentence-to-sentence influence generally pro-duces high similarity values, as seen in Figure 2. In contrast, when the same idea is distributed across multiple sentences, the similarity signal is diluted because each individual sentence contains only a portion of the shared meaning, which lowers the sentence-level similarity score as seen in Figure 3. Similar sentence to multiple sentence influence was identified in instance 3 from Table 1, showing the same results of diluted similarity signal, but results are not included in this paper. The difference in precision, recall and F1 scores are also important here. The higher precision indicates that most to-kens in Melville’s sentence matched strongly with those in the source. The comparatively lower re-call indicates the source contains more content that was not reflected in Melville’s sentence, as the idea read in the source sentence was distributed and ex-plained in multiple sentences in Melville’s writing. The example strongly illustrates the importance of subjecting computational results of this proce-dure to human expert examination. As an utterance inspired by multiple successive sentences in the work Melville read, the passage is deeply indebted to the source. It’s rhetoric, moreover, illustrates Melville’s frequent tendency in source appropria-tion to consciously "amplify" or "augment" stylisti-cally the attitude or claim conveyed in the original text–a practice that parallels his related method of reversing or opposing the attitude of a source, as seen in the example illustrated by Figure 1 (Olsen-Smith, 2011; Norberg and Olsen-Smith, 2023). Yet the low values in the output of Figure 3 do not on their face indicate a strong correlation. 

4.2 Model-Discovered Parallels: Additional Evidence of Influence 

After examining the expert-identified cases, we next analyzed the model’s broader output to ex-plore whether it could independently capture addi-tional instances of potential influence or semantic similarity. To this end, we reviewed the complete set of results for text from instance 2, Table 1 and present them in Figure 4 showing a heatmap of pre-cision values where Melville’s Israel Potter; His Fifty Years of Exile was compared with Trumbull’s 

Life and Remarkable Adventures of Israel R. Potter 

at the sentence level. The figure illustrates a di-verse range of color intensities. As in the previous figures, darker and red cells represent pairs with stronger similarity, while yellow and green cells indicate weaker similarity. A few features are visible in this figure. The pres-ence of the high value (red) diagonal line comes from Melville literally retelling the story from the source text for a novel conceived and openly ac-knowledged by Melville to be a rewriting of Trum-bull’s 1824 Life (Leyda, 1951). In the run of early chapters represented by the passages in Figure 4, Melville is believed to have transcribed words and expressions from Trumbull into approximately half the lines of his lost manuscript, occasionally adding "brief speculations on Israel’s motives, or his re-current foreshadowings of coming tribulations" (Bezanson, 1982). As composition proceeded be-yond the early chapters of Israel Potter, Melville allowed himself greater freedom from his source and introduced a variety of imaginative episodes that do not appear in Trumbull’s narrative. To gain deeper insight into these results, we iden-tified the cells corresponding to higher precision values and analyzed the associated text segments. For instance, from the full output, the highest value in the heatmap occurs at source sentence 6 and Melville’s sentence 11 where the precision value reached 0.8. These sentences along with the results are shown as the first text pair example in Table 2. The BERTScore of 0.80 indicates that most tokens in Melville’s sentence matched strongly with those in the source. However, the recall was lower (0.43) due to the source containing significantly more con-tent that was not reflected in Melville’s sentence. The resulting F1 score was 0.56, suggesting seman-tic overlap and possible conceptual influence. The second text pair in Table 2 is taken from the n-gram of 5 experiments from the same text pair instance Figure 3: Precision, recall and F1 score values for instance 4 from Table 1 comparing The Natural History of the Sperm Whale and Moby Dick     

> Figure 4: Heat map for complete text comparison of instance 2 in Table 1 comparing Life and Remarkable Adventures of Israel R. Potter with Israel Potter; His fifty years of exile at the sentence level.

i.e. instance 2 from Table 1 (Israel Potter). Here even at the 5-gram level of granularity the p, r and F1 values are high and the semantic similarity is also evident from the tokens as they reflect similar overall semantic meaning. Also visible are some vertical streaks at sen-tences 65 and 107 in Melville’s Israel Potter; His Fifty Years of Exile . This highlights one of the limi-tations: small or generic text tends to yield higher values, which may result in false positives. For ex-ample, sentence 65; “About noon the knight visited his workmen” produces relatively high similarity values because it is short and semantically generic, containing broad concepts such as time, authority, and labor. These elements occur frequently across many contexts, allowing embedding-based metrics to find plausible matches even when no specific relationship exists. As a result, this sentence has a higher potential to produce false positives. Simi-larly sentence 107 “Now the superintendent of the garden was a harsh, overbearing man.” yielded rel-atively high similarity values throughout because it describes a generic authority figure and evaluative traits that commonly appear in narrative texts. 

4.3 Evaluating Similarity at Different Levels of Text Granularity 

We have conducted experiments at both the n-gram of 5 and sentence levels to compare how the granu-larity of text segmentation affects the model’s abil-ity to detect semantic similarity. Both approaches successfully identified instances of correspondence between Melville’s writings and the source texts. The 5-gram analysis provided a more fine-grained view of similarity patterns. As illustrated in Fig-ure 1 and further supported by Table 2. The 5-gram method was particularly effective in capturing lo-calized lexical and semantic overlaps, short phrases or recurring expressions that might indicate influ-ence at the phrase level. In contrast, the sentence-level analysis yielded a broader contextual comparison but introduced variability in precision and recall values. This vari-ation primarily stems from differences in sentence length and the number of tokens being compared. When one sentence contains significantly more to-Table 2: Two text pair examples for model discovered parallels from Melville’s Israel Potter; His Fifty Years of Exile and Life and Remarkable Adventures of Israel R. Potter . The first is at the sentence level and the second at the 5-gram level. 

Melville Text Read Text Results 

Israel had now been three days without food, except one two-penny loaf. (sen-tence 11) I had now been three days without food (with the excep-tion of a single two-penny loaf) and felt myself unable much longer to resist the cravings of nature—my spirits, which until now had armed me with fortitude began to forsake me—indeed I was at this moment on the eve of despair! When, calling to mind that grief would only aggravate my calamity, I endeavoured to arm my soul with patience; and habituate myself as well as I could, to woe. Accordingly I roused my spirits; and banishing for a few moments these gloomy ideas, I began to reflect seriously on the methods by which to extricate myself from this labyrinth of horror. (sentence 6) p = 0.80 r = 0.43 F1 = 0.56 presenting a smaller sup-ply than (chunk 301) which containing a small quantity (chunk 88) p = 0.65 r = 0.70 F1 = 0.68 kens than the other, precision tends to be higher for shorter sentences, while recall decreases because a smaller portion of the longer sentence aligns se-mantically. The 5-gram method, by comparison, mitigates this issue by keeping token counts rela-tively consistent across comparisons, allowing for a more balanced representation of local similarity. Overall, these results suggest that the 5-gram segmentation approach is better suited for detecting localized lexical or phrasal similarities, while the sentence-level analysis provides complementary insights into broader semantic relationships. Using both levels of analysis together would offer a more comprehensive understanding of textual influence, capturing both micro-level echoes and macro-level thematic parallels. 

5 Limitations and Future Work 

This study operates under a few practical con-straints that shape the scope of the results. First, we used non overlapping five grams that offers an efficient segmentation strategy, although it may overlook similarities that cross unit boundaries. Us-ing overlapping five grams would yield more com-plete coverage of the text, but doing so substan-tially increases computational cost. This reflects an unavoidable tradeoff between granularity and computational efficiency. Second, a further limitation arose from the be-havior of BERTScore when comparing very short and generic sentences yielding high precision val-ues because their broad semantic content can be matched to many different contexts in the reference text, even when no meaningful similarity exists. This can also be seen in Figure 4 and discussed in detail in Section 4.2. Future work may address this by applying weighting scores by sentence speci-ficity, or incorporating additional models that bet-ter distinguish generic similarity from substantive semantic alignment. By selecting a complementary text comparison technique, many false positives could be removed from consideration. Finally, the analysis was conducted at only two segmentation levels: 5-gram and sentence-level. These levels work well when influence occurs at comparable spans of text, such as the sentence-to-sentence as shown in Figure 2. However, when the influence involves mismatched chunks such as a single sentence that draws on multiple sentences or an entire paragraph, sentence-level comparisons may yield lower similarity values simply because the comparison window is not aligned with the underlying structure of the influence. Additional segmentation strategies, including phrase-level and paragraph-level segmentation, may therefore bet-ter capture both localized and broader contextual similarities. 6 Conclusion 

This study explored whether semantic similarity methods, specifically BERTScore, can help iden-tify potential influence between Herman Melville’s writings and the books he read. Using expert-identified examples as a starting point, the analysis showed that BERTScore was able to detect these known similarities and also highlighted additional passages with notable semantic alignment. These findings suggest that semantic similarity measures can provide meaningful insights into possible con-nections between an author’s reading and writing. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Wallenberg AI, Au-tonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP), funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundations and counterpart funding from Luleå University of Technology (LTU). 

References 

Alaa Saleh Altheneyan and Mohamed El Bachir Menai. 2020. Automatic plagiarism detection in obfuscated text. Pattern Analysis and Applications , 23:1627– 1650. Mary K. Bercaw. 1987. Melville’s Sources . Northwest-ern University Press. Walter E. Bezanson. 1982. Historical note. In Harrison Hayford, Hershel Parker, and G. Thomas Tanselle, ed-itors, Israel Potter: His Fifty Years of Exile , volume 8 of The Writings of Herman Melville . Northwestern University Press and the Newberry Library, Evanston and Chicago. Paul Clough and Mark Stevenson. 2011. Developing a corpus of plagiarised short answers. Language resources and evaluation , 45:5–24. Matt Cohen, Ed Folsom, and Kenneth M. Price. The Walt Whitman Archive. Stefan Dernbach, Khushbu Agarwal, Alejandro Zu-niga, Michael Henry, and Sutanay Choudhury. 2024. Glam: Fine-tuning large language models for domain knowledge graph alignment via neighborhood parti-tioning and generative subgraph encoding. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Symposium Series , volume 3, pages 82–89. Paul Dijstelberge and Anthony Grafton. n.d. Annotated books online: A digital archive of early modern an-notated books. Accessed: 24 February 2026. Robert Essick and Joseph Viscomi. The William Blake Archive. Earle Havens, Lisa Jardine, and Matthew Symonds. n.d. The archaeology of reading. Principal Investigators: Earle Havens, Lisa Jardine, and Matthew Symonds. Accessed: 24 February 2026. Harrison Hayford and Walter Blair. 1969. Omoo: A Narrative of Adventures in the South Seas . Hendricks House, New York. Sebastian Jaskowski, Sahasra Chava, and Agam Shah. 2024. BERTScoreVisualizer: A Web Tool for Under-standing Simplified Text Evaluation with BERTScore. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17160 .Jay Leyda. 1951. The Melville Log: A Documentary Life of Herman Melville, 1819–1891 . Harcourt Brace, New York. 2 vols. John Livingston Lowes. 1927. The Road to Xanadu: A Study in the Ways of the Imagination . Houghton Mifflin. F. O. Mathiessen. 1941. American Renaissance Art and Expression in the Age of Emerson and Whitman .Oxford University Press. Sultan A Meo and Muhammad Talha. 2019. Turnitin: Is it a text matching or plagiarism detection tool? Saudi Journal of Anaesthesia , 13(Suppl 1):S48–S51. Peter Norberg and Steven Olsen-Smith. 2023. The tech-nical development and expanding scope of melville’s marginalia online. Leviathan , 25(2):61–85. Steven Olsen-Smith. 2011. Melville’s copy of Thomas Beale’s" The natural history of the sperm whale and the composition of Moby-Dick". Harvard Library Bulletin , 21(3):1–77. Fall 2010. Steven Olsen-Smith. 2022. Books and marginalia, real and virtual. A New Companion to Herman Melville ,page 283. Steven Olsen-Smith, Peter C Norberg, and Dennis C Marnon. 2006. Melville’s Marginalia Online . Boise State University. Zhyar Rzgar K Rostam, Márta Takács, and Gábor Kertész. 2025. Evaluating large language models: A review of metrics and benchmarks. In 2025 IEEE 23rd Jubilee International Symposium on Intelli-gent Systems and Informatics (SISY) , pages 000233– 000240. IEEE. Frane Šari´ c, Goran Glavaš, Mladen Karan, Jan Šnajder, and Bojana Dalbelo Baši´ c. 2012. Takelab: Systems for measuring semantic text similarity. In * SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012) , pages 441– 448. Jr. Sealts, Merton M. 1988. Melville’s Reading . Univer-sity of South Carolina Press. Includes bibliographical references and index. Prasha Shrestha and Thamar Solorio. 2013. Using a variety of n-grams for the detection of different kinds of plagiarism. Notebook for PAN at CLEF , 2013. Simon Suchomel, Jan Kasprzak, Michal Brandejs, et al. 2012. Three way search engine queries with multi-feature document comparison for pla-giarism detection. In CLEF (Online Working Notes/Labs/Workshop) , pages 1–8. Yuki Tanahashi, Kyoko Kanzaki, Eiko Yamamoto, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2020. Improving semantic similarity calculation of Japanese text for MT evaluation. In 

Proceedings of the 34th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation , pages 542– 550. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Wein-berger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. BertScore: Evalu-ating text generation with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .